Other notable alcohols are isopropyl alcohol (2-propanol), which is present in rubbing alcohol, and ethylene glycol, which is the primary component in antifreeze.
Except for ethanol, alcohols are very hazardous when ingested - for instance methanol causes blindness - and can be created in uncontrolled fermentation processes.
Alcohols are in wide use in industry and science as reagents, solvents, and fuels.
State-of-the-art engineering has achieved replacement of gasoline (and other hydrocarbons which produce toxic fumes) with forms of alcohol such as ethanol or methanol (which burn more cleanly).

The hydroxyl groups in alcohols are capable of forming hydrogen bonds to one another and to other compounds.
Two opposing solubility trends in alcohols are: the tendancy of the polar OH to promote solubility in water, and of the carbon chain to resist it.
Thus, methanol, ethanol, and propanol are highly miscible in water because the hydroxyl group predominates.
Butanol is moderately soluble because of a balance between the two trends.
Pentanol and branched butanols are effectively insoluble because of the hydrocarbon chain's dominance.
Because of hydrogen bonding, alcohols tend to have higher boiling points than comparable hydrocarbons and ethers.

One important class of reactions undergone by alcohols is nucleophilic substitution, where one nucleophilic group attached to a carbon atom is replaced by another.
So, for instance, alcohols react with hydrochloric acid to produce alkyl halides, where the hydroxyl group is replaced by a chlorine atom.
The equilibrium lies to the right, since chlorine is a stronger nucleophile, but can be driven to the left using an alkaline medium, which is one way of synthesizing alcohols.

Alcohols are themselves nucleophilic, so can react with one another to produce ethers and water.
They also react with hydroxy acids (or acid halides) to produce compounds called esters, of which the esters of organic acids are the most important.
At high temperatures, alcohols can under go an elimination reaction to produce alkenes.
The reverse of this, the addition of water to an alkene to produce an alcohol, is catalyzed by acids but is of limited use for synthesis because it generally results in mixtures.
Some other techniques exist to convert alkenes to alcohols more reliably.

Alcohols often have an odor described as 'biting' that 'hangs' in the nasal passages.
All alcohols are poisonous, including ethanol.
Part of the reason it is less poisonous than other alcohols is that it breaks down more readily than other alcohols.

There are two naming systems used for alcohols: Common or trivial nomenclature, and IUPAC nomenclature.
Common names usually take the name of the alkyl group and add the word "alcohol", e.g. methyl alcohol and ethyl alcohol.
Under the IUPAC naming scheme, the name of the alkane chain looses the terminal "e" and adds "ol", e.g. methanol and ethanol.

For more complex alcohols, the common name depends on whether the alcohol is primary, secondary or tertiary.
Propyl alchol may be named n-propyl alcohol or sec-propyl alcohol depending on whether the hydroxyl group is bonded to the 1st or 2nd carbon on the propane chain.
Secondary propyl alcohol is also called isopropyl alcohol.

The IUPAC names for these place the position of the hydroxyl group between the alkane name and the "ol": propan-1-ol in the first case, propan-2-ol in the second.
Sometimes, the position number proceeds the IUPAC name: 1-propanol and 2-propanol.
"Hydroxy" is also sometimes used as a prefix instead: 1-hydroxypropane, 2-hydroxypropane.

A glycol is the common name of an alcohol with two attached hydroxyl groups, e.g. HOCHCHOH is ethylene glycol.
The IUPAC name is ethane-1,2-diol, "diol" indicating two hydroxyl groups, and 1,2 indicating their bonding positions.
For three or four groups, "triol" and "tetraol" are used.

It can therefore be regarded as a derivative of water, with an alkyl group replacing one of the hydrogens.
If an aryl group is present rather than an alkyl, the compound is generally called a phenol rather than an alcohol.
The oxygen in an alcohol has a bond angle of around 109° (c.f.
104.5° in water), and two nonbonded electron pairs.
The O-H bond in methanol (CH OH) is around 0.96 Å (9.6 nm) in length.

For more details see  In the IUPAC system, the name of the alkane chain loses the terminal "e" and adds "ol", e.g. "methanol" and "ethanol".

Alcohols, like water, can show either acidic or basic properties at the O-H group.
With a pKSub>a of around 16-19 they are generally slightly weaker acids than water, but they are still able to react with stong bases such as sodium hydride or reactive metals such as sodium.
The salts that result are called alkoxides, with the general formula RO M. Meanwhile the oxygen atom has lone pairs of nonbonded electrons that render it weakly basic in the presence of strong acids such as sulfuric acid.
For example, with methanol:

In other chemical reactions, neutral alcohols do not usually undergo nucleophilic substitution.
However when activated by an electrophile such as H, forming the protonated form as shown above, alcohols can undergo nuclephilic substitution reactions via the S1 or S2 mechanism.
Alcohols can also behave as nucleophiles, with the oxygen lone pairs attacking the electrophile.
For more details see the section below.


Alcohol, ethyl alcohol or ethanol, is a solvent that is used as a beverage, topical antiseptic, in colognes, and in some instances a rubbing alcohol.
Alcohol use may be seen in adolescents and may affect their normal function as well as threaten society., especially if the adolescent is driving under the influence of alcohol.
The effects of alcohol depend on the level.
The alcohol level depends on the quantity of alcohol ingested, the size of the patient, and whether food was ingested.
A person on most states is medico legally intoxicated at 100 mg/dl.
At 50 to 150 mg/dl the patient is uncoordinated and has blurred vision and a slow reaction time.
At 150 to 300 mg/dl stupor, hypoglycemia, and coma are present.
A level greater than 500 mg/dl is fatal if the patient has no tolerance.
An alcohol and blood glucose level should be obtained.
The treatment is supportive.
Hypoglycemia and acidosis should be treated.
Artificial ventilation may be needed for respiratory failure.
Alcohol is rapidly absorbed from the gut and is not adsorbed by activated charcoal, therefore GI contamination of patients presenting more than 2 hours after ingestion should not be done.
Gastric lavage shoudl be used in earlier presentations.
However, activated charcoal shoudl be administered to adolescents because of the potential drug coingestion.
Dialysis should be considered for blood alcohol levels greater than 400 mg/dl.
Hypoglycemia and seizures may occur.
Death may result from respiratory failure.

The hydroxyl group generally makes the alcohol molecule polar.
Those groups can form hydrogen bonds to one another and to other compounds.
This hydrogen bonding means that alcohols can be used as protic solvents.
Two opposing solubility trends in alcohols are: the tendency of the polar OH to promote solubility in water, and of the carbon chain to resist it.
Thus, methanol, ethanol, and propanol are miscible in water because the hydroxyl group wins out over the short carbon chain.
Butanol, with a four-carbon chain, is moderately soluble because of a balance between the two trends.
Alcohols of five or more carbons (Pentanol and higher) are effectively insoluble in water because of the hydrocarbon chain's dominance.
All simple alcohols are miscible in organic solvents.

Alcohols, like water, can show either acidic or basic properties at the O-H group.
With a pK of around 16-19 they are generally slightly weaker acids than water, but they are still able to react with strong bases such as sodium hydride or reactive metals such as sodium.
The salts that result are called alkoxides, with the general formula RO M.

Alcohols can also undergo oxidation to give aldehydes, ketones or carboxylic acids, or they can be dehydrated to alkenes.
They can react to form ester compounds, and they can (if activated first) undergo nucleophilic substitution reactions.
The lone pairs of electrons on the oxygen of the hydroxyl group also makes alcohols nucleophiles.
For more details see the reactions of alcohols section below.