Aristophanes was probably victorious at least once at the City Dionysia, with Babylonians in 426 (IG II2 2325.
58), and at least three times at the Lenaia, with Acharnians in 425, Knights in 424, and Frogs in 405.
His sons Araros, Philippus, and Nicostratus were also comic poets: Araros is said to have been heavily involved in the production of Wealth II in 388 (test.
1.
54–6) and to have been responsible for the posthumous performances of Aeolosicon II and Cocalus (Cocalus test.
iii), with which he seems to have taken the prize at the City Dionysia in 387 (IG II2 2318.
196), while Philippus was twice victorious at the Lenaia (IG II2 2325.
140) and apparently produced some of Eubulus’ comedies (Eub.
test.
4).
(Aristophanes’ third son is sometimes said to have been called not Nicostratus but Philetaerus, and a man by that name appears in the catalogue of Lenaia victors with two victories, the first probably in the late 370s, at IG II2 2325.
143 (just after Anaxandrides and just before Eubulus).)

Of the surviving plays, Clouds, was a disastrous production resulting in a humiliating and long-remembered (cf. the parabasis of the revised (preserved) version of the play, and the parabasis of the following year's "Wasps").
The play placed poorly at the City Dionysia, and satirizes the new, sophistic learning en vogue among the aristocracy at the time; Socrates was the principal target and emerges as a typical Sophist.
Lysistrata was written during the Peloponnesian War between Athens and Sparta and argues not so much for pacifist as for the idea that the states ought not to be fighting once another at this point but combining to rule Greece.
This is accomplished within the play when the women of the two states show off their bodies and deprive their husbands of sex until they stop fighting.

In The Frogs, Aristophanes’ language is one which the ancient greek ear would undoubtedly understand as the language of a slave; the slave, no less of Dionysus the god of wine, the god to whom this festival was dedicated, the god who, philosophically speaking, “decapitated” the people three times a year for about a week, to allow their deeper, darker, more impulsive nature to act out its desire.
He –or, rather the Greeks- did this by “switching off” as it were, Apollo’s light (man’s mind) with the drinking of wine and giving full freedom for everything below the neck to work: bowls, spleen, heart etc, that is to say, during those Dionysiac festivals, man acted not according to the mind but according to his desires: Mind and Desire are enemies.
The stage, therefore was there to display exactly that dualism: Mind (Apollo) v Desire (Dionysus).
And moreover, the tragedians would display the “lofty” sentiments and behaviour called for by the gods and by Apollo whereas the comedians (particularly those of the Old Comedy like Aristophanes) would display the “innermost” wishes of the people.
The language used by each dramaturge therefore, would display exactly that: Tragedians would use the language of the “enlightened,” and the comedians that of the “decapitated” ie, the drunk.

Many silly essays have been written to explain away Aristophanes’ language with erroneous conclusions.
The writers of these essays usually talk of his “subtlety” or his “brilliant innuendos” or his “eloquent use of euphemisms” etc. Whilst this, Aristophanes did do, he, in fact, was also quite keen to use the language of the common villager (Trygeas is an excellent example in “Peace”) as well as that of the city sleeker, the language of the corrupt politician (Magistrate in “Lysistrata”) as well as the sex-starved soldier and his wife (Kinesias and Myrrhini also in “Lysistrata”).
In these plays, as in all his other, Aristophanes felt no social, religious or philosophical compunction in using the language which many have and still do, consider to be “foul.” On the contrary, Aristophanes challenged most vigorously and with all the comedic wit his fertile imagination would allow, all these oppressive religious and social values and, for all the jokes he made against Socrates in his “Clouds” his love for and behaviour in Athens was much like that of the philosopher.
In fact, both were brought to the courts (assembly) Aristophanes for defamation (though the charge was that he was not a true citizen of Athens) and Socrates for “corrupting the youth… and for not believing in Athens’ gods” Aristophanes was shaken but not condemned to death, Socrates, on the other hand was and he died swallowing hemlock.

Thankfully, the circulation of many old books where Aristophanes’ best and most hilarious passages have been removed, has now clearly stopped and one is able to buy the complete text of his every single play.
What is, alas, still going on, is the mistranslating of certain words or passages so as to serve either one of two masters, namely, either the board of directors of a number of English-speaking universities, or the publishers who seek to attract every member of the “family” by having all of Aristophanes’ language translated to the lowest possible common denominator of linguistic offensiveness.
This practice, too, is receding and the Internet has provided a new type of publishing to take place where one is not beholden to either of the two types of prohibition stated above.
Aristophanes’ language is now being translated more and more accurately with every new translation and by people who better understand it.

() We know less about Aristophanes than about his plays.
In fact it is from his plays that we get most of our biographical information.
It was conventional in Old Comedy for the author to address the audience through the Chorus and thus some biographical facts can be got 'straight from the horse's mouth'.
His first play 'The Banqueters' (now lost) won second prize at the City Dionysia in 427 BCE.
Its production however was listed under the name of his friend, Callistratus, and comments made by Aristophanes in The Clouds have been interpreted as evidence that he can have been hardly more than eighteen years old when 'The Banqueters' was produced.
The young author won first prize with his next play, 'The Babylonians' (now lost), a polemical satire on Athenian life.
Not everybody enjoyed the humour and Aristophanes soon found himself in court on a charge of slandering the Athenian polis.
The details of the trial are unrecorded but, speaking through the hero of his third play The Acharnians, he carefully distinguishes between the polis and the real targets of his acerbic wit:  It is possible that he expressed himself in his plays and that they capture his real opinions and his character.
On the other hand it has been argued that he produced plays mainly to amuse the audience and to win prestigious competitions, since the writing of plays was in fact a craft handed down from father to son.
The audiences were huge, with seating for at least 10 000 at the Theatre of Dionysus, but it is not certain that they amounted to a representative sample of the Athenian citizenry.
The day's program at the City Dionysia was crowded, with three tragedies and a 'satyr' play ahead of the comedy and it is possible that some of the 'riff-raff', on whom populists such as Cleon relied for their political influence, spent the holiday in other pursuits.
It appears that Aristophanes' relentless caricatures had no effect on Cleon's political career.
In fact, a few weeks after the performance of The Knights, a play that is full of anti-Cleon jokes, Cleon was elected to the prestigious board of ten generals.
Equally, Cleon seems to have had no real power to limit or control Aristophanes since the caricatures of him continue up to and even after his death.
Aristophanes claimed to be writing for a clever and discerning audience yet he also declared that 'other times' would judge the audience according to its reception of his plays.
The judges of the plays were chosen by an elaborate series of lotteries, apparently designed to prevent prejudice or corruption, and in the end only five votes decided the places awarded to the competing dramatists, yet these judges probably responded to the mood of the audience.
yet his plays are opposed to the war with Sparta and they are particularly scathing in criticism of war-profiteers, among whom populists such as Cleon are included.
By the time his last play was produced (around 386 BCE), Athens had been defeated in war, its empire had been dismantled and it had undergone a transformation from the political to the intellectual centre of Greece.
Aristophanes was part of this transformation and he shared in the intellectual enlightenment.
The structure of his plays evolves from Old Comedy until, in Wealth II (his last surviving play), it more closely resembles New Comedy, but it is uncertain whether he led or merely responded to changes in audience expectations.
He sometimes boasts of his originality yet his plays consistently espouse opposition to radical, new influences.
He caricatured leading figures in the arts (notably Euripides, whose influence on his own work however he once begrudgingly acknowledged), in politics (especiallyCleon), and in philosophy/religion (where Socrates was the most obvious target).
from statements in The Clouds and Peace that Aristophanes was prematurely bald, and from statements in The Acharnians that he had some kind of close association with the island of Aegina.
Inscriptions and summaries or comments by Hellenistic and Byzantine scholars can also provide useful clues.

'Frogs' in fact won the unique distinction of a repeat performance at the City Dionysia a few weeks later.
We know that a son of Aristophanes, Araros, was also a comic poet and he could have been heavily involved in the production of his father's play Wealth II in 388.
Araros is also thought to have been responsible for the posthumous performances of the now lost plays Aeolosicon II and Cocalus, and it is possible that the last of these won the prize at the City Dionysia in 387.
It purports to be a record of conversations at a dinner party at which both Aristophanes and Socrates are guests.
The party is supposed to have occured some seven years after the performance of The Clouds (the play in which Socrates was cruelly caricatured) and yet there is no indication of any ill-feeling between the two men.
Plato's Aristophanes is in fact a genial character and this has been interpreted as evidence of Plato's friendship with him (their friendship appears to be corroborated by an epitaph for Aristophanes, reputedly written by Plato, in which the playwright's soul is compared to an eternal shrine for the Graces).
Conversation among the guests turns to the subject of Love and Aristophanes explains his notion of it in terms of an amusing allegory.
The humorous use of a seriously intended allegory is a device he often uses in his plays (The Knights for example) and his use of it in 'The Symposium' is just what we might expect from him after reading his plays.
He prefaces his allegory with the comment that he is quite happy to be thought amusing but he is wary of appearing ridiculous.
This fear of being ridiculed is consistent with his declaration in 'The Knights' that he embarked on a career of comic playwright warily, fearful of the public contempt and ridicule that other dramatists had incurred.
Plato was only a boy when the events in 'The Symposium' are supposed to have occurred and it is possible that his Aristophanes is in fact based on a reading of the plays   Socrates, in the trial leading up to his death, put the question of political justice in those troubled times quite succinctly: Students of Aristophanes can only wonder how the great dramatist might have responded to this.

The Greek word for 'comedy' (komoidia) derives from the words for 'revel' and 'song' (komos and ode) and, according to Aristotle, comic drama actually developed from song.
The first, official comedy however was not staged at the City Dionysia until 487/6 BCE, by which time tragedy had already been long established.
The first comedy was staged at the Lenaia later still - just some twenty years before the performance there of 'The Acharnians' (Aristophanes' third play).
According to Aristotle, comedy was slow to gain official acceptance because nobody took it seriously and yet, only sixty years after comedy first appeared at 'The City Dionysia', Aristophanes was able to describe his work as the most difficult work of all.
Competition at the Dionysian festivals required the existence of dramatic conventions for plays to be judged yet it also fuelled innovations.
Developments were quite rapid and Aristotle was able to distinguish between 'old' and 'new' comedy by 330 BCE.
The trend from Old Comedy to New Comedy involved a trend away from a highly topical emphasis on real individuals and local issues towards a broader frame of reference with stock characters and situations.
The trend was due in part to the internationalizing of cultural perspectives during and after The Peloponnesian War.
For ancient commentators such Plutarch, the development of New Comedy represented increased sophistication, yet Old Comedy was in fact a complex and sophisticated art form incorporating many approaches to humour and entertainment.

In the City Dionysia, a statue of the god Dionysus was brought to the theatre from a temple outside the city and it remained in the theatre throughout the festival, overseeing the plays like a priviledged member of the audience.
In Aristophanes' play The Frogs, however, Dionysus enters the theatre as a ludicrous figure unconvincingly disguised as Hercules.
He observes to the audience that, every time he is on hand to hear a joke from a comic dramatist like Phrynichus (one of Aristophanes' rivals), he ages by more than a year.
The scene opens the play and it is a reminder to the audience that almost nobody is above mockery in Old Comedy - not even its patron god or its practitioners!
Gods, artists, politicians and even ordinary citizens were legitimate targets, comedy was a kind of licensed buffoonery and there was no legal redress for anyone who was slandered in a play.
There were some limits on the scope of the satire but they are not easily defined.
Impiety could be punished in Fifth Century Athens but absurdities implicit in traditional religion were open to ridicule.
The polis was not allowed to be slandered but, as stated in the biography, that could depend on who was in the audience and which festival was involved.
Both festivals were in honour of Dionysus, a god who represented Man's darker nature, and Old Comedy was a celebration of the exuberant sense of release inherent in his worship (Euripides' play The Bacchae offers the best insight into the Fifth Century ideas about this god).
Old Comedy is more interested in finding targets than in advocating any line of policy It requires victims and hence its emphasis on real individuals and local issues.

Aristophanes began his career writing in the Old Comedy genre but he always varied the structure of his plays from year to year and, in his last surviving play, Wealth (II), he changed the thematic focus from local issues towards broader issues that an international audience might easily relate to.
For convenience, Old Comedy, as represented by Aristophanes' early plays, is analysed here according to three broad characteristics - topicality, festivity and complexity.
The Lenaia and City Dionysus were state-sponsored, religious festivals and, though the latter was the more prestigious of the two, both were occasions for official pomp and circumstance.
The ceremonies for the Lenaia were overseen by the archon basileus and by officials of the Eleusinian mysteries.
The City Dionysia was overseen by the archon eponymus and the priest of Dionysus.
Emblems of religion and state had a theatrical quality.
Opening ceremonies for the City Dionysia featured, in addition to the ceremonial arrival of the god, a parade in full armour of the sons of warriors who died fighting for the polis and, up until the end of the Peloponnesian War, a presentation of annual tribute from subject states.
The religious and political life of the audience could hardly be ignored in the circumstances and the comic dramatist found in religion and politics a source of inspiration and an abundance of material.
Soothsayers, oracle mongers and the exponents of new religious practices were a favourite target but so were the traditional gods.
In The Birds, for example, the Olympian dynasty is besieged and forced to capitulate to an enterprising Athenian, who seals his victory by marrying Zeus's paramour.
In The Frogs, Dionysus is presented as a craven dandy who provokes Heracles to laughter and who fails to command the respect even of his own slave.
Yet the black humour of the plays sometimes serves as a dramatic foil to moments of true piety.
InThe Knights, for example, the humour is unusually black owing to unrelenting attacks on Cleon, yet this play also includes grave and beautiful hymns invoking Poseidon and Athena.
Sometimes political topics are also presented in a positive way, such as the revelation of a miraculously transformed Demos (i.e. the morally reformed people of Athens), imaginative visions of a return to peaceful activities resulting from peace with Sparta, and a plea for leniency for citizens suspected of complicity in an oligarchic revolt.
Aristophanes' humour however is predominantly satirical and the personalities associated with the pro-war populist faction attract the darkest humour.
In The Acharnians, for example, Lamachus is represented as a maniacal war-monger whose preparations for war are put in hilarious relief to the hero's preparations for a dinner party.
Cleon emerges from numerous similes and metaphors in the The Knights as a protean form of comic evil, resisting inevitable defeat by every possible means for as long as he can.
A festival audience however presented the comic dramatist with a wide range of targets and the humour wasn't confined to politics and religion - anyone could be mocked for any reason, such as diseases, physical deformities, ugliness, family misfortunes, bad manners, perversions, dishonesty, cowardice in battle, clumsiness etc.

The emphasis on real personalities and local issues had some unique consequences for the staging of Old Comedy.
All actors in classical Athens wore masks but, whereas in tragedy and New Comedy, these identified stereotypical characters, in Old Comedy the masks were often caricatures of real people.
It is possible that Socrates attracted an unusual amount of attention in Old Comedy because his distinct face lent itself easily to caricature by mask-makers.
In 'The Knights' we are told that the mask makers were too afraid to make a caricature of Cleon (there represented as a Paphlagonian slave) but we are also assured that the audience is clever enough to identify him anyway..
Since Old Comedy makes numerous references to people in the audience, theatre was the real scene of action and theatrical illusion was treated as something of a joke.
In The Acharnians, for example, The Pnyx is just a few steps from the hero's front door, and in Peace Olympia is separated from Athens by a few moments' supposed flight on a dung beetle.
The audience is sometimes drawn or even dragged into the action.
When the hero in 'Peace' returns to Athens from his flight to Olympia, he tells the audience that they looked like rascals when seen from the heavens and, seen up close, they look even worse.
In 'The Acharnians', the hero confronts the Archon Basileus, sitting in the front row, and demands to be awarded first prize for a drinking competition, which is a none too subtle way for Aristophanes to request first prize for the drama competition.
His frequent parodying of tragedy is an aspect of Old Comedy that modern audiences find difficult to understand yet the Lenaia and City Dionysia included performances of both comedies and tragedies and thus literary references were highly topical and immediately relevant to the original audience.
The topicality of Old Comedy allowed the dramatist even to refer to himself and, in the spirit of the occasion, this included mockery.
It is possible, as indicated earlier, that he mocked his own baldness, and he also compared himself in his early career to an unwed, young mother.
The Lenaia and City Dionysia were religious festivals but, in classical Athens, they resembled a gala rather than a church service.
A relaxation in standards of behaviour was permitted and the holiday spirit included bawdy irreverence towards both men and gods.
Old Comedy is rich in obscenities and the crude jokes are often very detailed, as when the Chorus in 'The Acharnians' places a curse on Antimachus, a choregus accused of niggardly conduct, wishing upon him a night-time mugging as he returns home from some drunken party and envisioning him, as he stoops down to pick up a rock in the darkness, accidentally picking up a fresh turd instead.
Hurling the turd at his attackers, he accidentally hits Cratinus, a lyric poet not admired by Aristophanes What makes this curse funny is the fact that it was sung (or chanted) in choreographed style by a Chorus of 24 grown men and, in the original performance, these were amateurs known to the audience as responsible citizens.
The Chorus was vital to the success of a play in Old Comedy long after it had lost its relevance for tragedy.
Technically, the competition in the dramatic festivals was not between poets but between choruses.
In fact eight of Aristophanes' eleven surviving plays are named after the Chorus.
In Aristophanes' time, the Chorus in tragedy was relatively small (twelve members) and its role had been reduced to that of an awkwardly placed commentator, but in Old Comedy the Chorus was actively involved in the plot, its entry into the action was frequently spectacular, its movements were practised with military precision and sometimes it was involved in choreographed skirmishes with the actors.
The expenditure on costumes, training and maintenance of a Chorus was considerable and it is possible that many people in the original audience enjoyed comedy mainly for the spectacle and music.
The chorus gradually lost its significance as New Comedy began to develop.

Consistent with the holiday spirit, much of the humour in Old Comedy is slapstick buffoonery that doesn't require the audience's careful attention, often relying on visual cues.
Actors playing male roles appear to have worn tights over grotesque padding, with a prodigious, leather phallus barely concealed by a short tunic.
Female characters were played by men but were easily recognized in long, saffron tunics.
Sometimes the visual cues are deliberately confused for comic effect, as in 'The Frogs', where Dionysus arrives on stage in a saffron tunic, the buskin boots of a tragic actor and a lion skin cloak that usually characterized Heracles - an outfit that provokes the latter (as no doubt it provoked the audience) to guffaws of helpless mirth.
The holiday spirit might also have been responsible for an aspect of the comic plot that can seem bewildering to modern audiences.
The major confrontation ('agon') between the 'good' and 'bad' characters in a play is often resolved decisively in favour of the former long before the end of the play.
The rest of the play deals with farcical consequences in a succession of loosely connected scenes.
The farcical anti-climax has been explained in a variety of ways, depending on the particular play.
In 'The Wasps', for instance, it has been thought to indicate a gradual change in the main character's perspective as the lessons of the agon are slowly absorbed.
In 'The Acharnians', it has been explained in terms of a unifying theme that underlies the episodes, demonstrating the practical benefits that come with wisdom.
But the early release of dramatic tension is consistent with the holiday meanings in Old Comedy and it allows the audience to relax in uncomplicated enjoyment of the spectacle, the music, jokes and celebrations that characterize the remainder of the play.
The celebration of the hero's victory often involves a sexual conquest and sometimes it takes the form of a wedding.
In Aristophanic comedy, the hero typically devises a fanciful escape from an intolerable situation.
He has something of the ingenuity of Homer's Odysseus and much of the shrewdness of the farmer idealized in Hesiod's Works and Days, subjected to corrupt leaders and unreliable neighbours.
Thus Dikaiopolis in 'The Acharnians' contrives a private peace treaty with the Spartans; Bdelucleon in 'The Wasps' turns his own house into a private law court in order to keep his jury-addicted father safely at home; Trygaeus in 'Peace' flies to Olympus on a giant dung beetle to obtain an end to the Peloponnesian War; Pisthetairus in 'Birds' sets off to establish his own colony and becomes instead the ruler of the bird kingdom and a rival to the gods.
Fantasy in Old Comedy is unrestricted and impossibilities are ignored Situations are developed logically to absurd conclusions, an approach to humour that is echoed for instance in the works of Lewis Carroll and Eugene Ionesco (the Theatre of the Absurd).
The crazy costume worn by Dionysus in 'The Frogs' is typical of an absurd result obtained on logical grounds - he wears a woman's saffron-coloured tunic because effeminacy is an aspect of his divinity, buskin boots because he is interested in reviving the art of tragedy, and a lion skin cape because, like Heracles, his mission leads him into Hades.
Absurdities develop logically from initial premises in a plot.
In The Knights for instance, Cleon's corrupt service to the people of Athens is originally depicted as a household relationship in which the slave dupes his master.
The introduction of a rival, who is not a member of the household, leads to an absurd shift in the metaphor, so that Cleon and his rival become erastai competing for the affections of an eromenos, hawkers competing for the attention of a buyer, athletes racing each other and, more realistically, orators competing for the popular vote.
The numerous surprising developments in an Aristophanic plot, the changes in scene, and the farcical comings and goings of minor characters towards the end of a play, were managed according to theatrical convention with only three principal actors (a fourth actor, often the leader of the chorus, was permitted to deliver short speeches).
Despite the wild improbabilities in an Aristophanic plot, and the organizational difficulties they imposed, the plays are couched in disciplined verse and in a highly formal, dramatic structure that is repeated with minor variations from one play to another.
The structural elements of a typical plot are as follows:The rules of competition did not prevent a playwright arranging and adjusting these elements to suit his particular needs.
Some plays feature a second parabasis for instance and, in Frogs, the first parabasis is in a shortened form.
The trend towards New Comedy involved an increase in the length and frequency of episodes at the expense of the other elements.
The complexity of Old Comedy, as practised by Aristophanes, appears not only in the structure of the plays but also in their ambivalence.
Are we meant to take the plays seriously or are they light entertainment?
How do we accommodate the serious, moral significance that underlies the action on the stage with the blithe silliness of the choral lyrics?
Equally, how do we accommodate the haunting beuty of some lyrics with the bawdy irreverence of some of the dialogue?
How do we accommodate the absurdity and the savagery of Old Comedy within the formal discipline of verse and conventional structure?
Old Comedy captured the vibrant and chaotic energies of a city whose extremes brought a quick end to its imperial ambitions.
(A work in progress - meanwhile redirect to Parabasis)

The Greek word for 'comedy' (kōmōidía) derives from the words for 'revel' and 'song' (kōmos and ōdē) and according to Aristotle comic drama actually developed from song.
The first, official comedy at the City Dionysia was not staged until 487/6 BC, by which time tragedy had already been long established there.
The first comedy at the Lenaia was staged later still, only about 20 years before the performance there of The Acharnians, the first of Aristophanes' surviving plays.
According to Aristotle, comedy was slow to gain official acceptance because nobody took it seriously yet, only sixty years after comedy first appeared at 'The City Dionysia', Aristophanes observed that producing comedies was the most difficult work of all.
Competition at the Dionysian festivals needed dramatic conventions for plays to be judged, but it also fuelled innovations.
Developments were quite rapid and Aristotle was able to distinguish between 'old' and 'new' comedy by 330 BC.
The trend from Old Comedy to New Comedy saw a move away from highly topical concerns with real individuals and local issues towards generalized situations and stock characters.
This was partly due to the internationalization of cultural perspectives during and after the Peloponnesian War.
For ancient commentators such as Plutarch, New Comedy was a more sophisticated form of drama than Old Comedy.
However Old Comedy was in fact a complex and sophisticated dramatic form incorporating many approaches to humour and entertainment.

For convenience, Old Comedy, as represented by Aristophanes' early plays, is analysed below in terms of three broad characteristics — topicality, festivity and complexity.
Dramatic structure contributes to the complexity of Aristophanes' plays.
However it is associated with poetic rhythms and meters that have little relevance to English translations and it is therefore treated in a separate section.
Old Comedy's emphasis on real personalities and local issues makes the plays difficult to appreciate today without the aid of scholarly commentaries — see for example articles on The Knights, The Wasps and Peace for lists of topical references.
The topicality of the plays had unique consequences for both the writing and the production of the plays in ancient Athens.
The Lenaia and City Dionysia were religious festivals, but they resembled a gala rather than a church service.
The development of New Comedy involved a trend towards more realistic plots, a simpler dramatic structure and a softer tone.
Old Comedy was the comedy of a vigorously democratic polis at the height of its power and it gave Aristophanes the freedom to explore the limits of humour, even to the point of undermining the humour itself.
The structural elements of a typical Aristophanic plot can be summarized as follows:The rules of competition did not prevent a playwright arranging and adjusting these elements to suit his particular needs.
In The Acharnians and Peace, for example, there is no formal agon whereas in The Clouds there are two agons.
The parabasis is an address to the audience by the Chorus and/or the leader of the Chorus while the actors are leaving or have left the stage.
The Chorus in this role speaks sometimes out of character, as the author's mouthpiece, and sometimes in character, but very often it isn't easy to distinguish its two roles.
Generally the parabasis occurs somewhere in the middle of a play and often there is a second parabasis towards the end.
The elements of a parabasis have been defined and named by scholars but it is probable that Aristophanes' own understanding was less formal.
The selection of elements can vary from play to play and it varies considerably within plays between first and second parabasis.
The early plays (The Acharnians to The Birds) are fairly uniform in their approach however and the following elements of a parabasis can be found within them.The Wasps is thought to offer the best example of a conventional approach and the elements of a parabasis can be identified and located in that play as follows.
Textual corruption is probably the reason for the absence of the antistrophe in the second parabasis.
However, there are several variations from the ideal even within the early plays.
For example, the parabasis proper in The Clouds (lines 518-62) is composed in eupolidean meter rather than in anapests and the second parabasis includes a kommation but it lacks strophe, antistrophe and antepirrhema (The Clouds lines 1113-30).
The second parabasis in The Acharnians lines 971-99 can be considered a hybrid parabasis/song (i.e. the declaimed sections are merely continuations of the strophe and antistrophe) and, unlike the typical parabasis, it seems to comment on actions that occur on stage during the address.
An understanding of Old Comedy conventions such as the parabasis is necessary for a proper understanding of Aristophanes' plays; on the other hand, a sensitive appreciation of the plays is necessary for a proper understanding of the conventions.