Oh, this "noble" culture of ours!
It speaks so piously of human dignity and human rights and then disregards this dignity and these rights of countless millions and treads them underfoot, only because they live overseas or because their skins are of different color or because they cannot help themselves.
This culture does not know how hollow and miserable and full of glib talk it is, how common it looks to those who follow it across the seas and see what it has done there, and this culture has no right to speak of personal dignity and human rights...

I will not enumerate all the crimes that have been committed under the pretext of justice.
People robbed native inhabitants of their land, made slaves of them, let loose the scum of mankind upon them.
Think of the atrocities that were perpetrated upon people made subservient to us, how systematically we have ruined them with our alcoholic "gifts," and everything else we have done…We decimate them, and then, by the stroke of a pen, we take their land so they have nothing left at all…

If all this oppression and all this sin and shame are perpetrated under the eye of the German God, or the American God, or the British God, and if our states do not feel obliged first to lay aside their claim to be "Christian" - then the name of Jesus is blasphemed and made a mockery.
And the Christianity of our states is blasphemed and made a mockery before those poor people.
The name of Jesus has become a curse, and our Christianity - yours and mine - has become a falsehood and a disgrace, if the crimes are not atoned for in the very place where they were instigated.
For every person who committed an atrocity in Jesus' name, someone must step in to help in Jesus' name; for every person who robbed, someone must bring a replacement; for everyone who cursed, someone must bless.

And now, when you speak about missions, let this be your message: We must make atonement for all the ter­rible crimes we read of in the newspapers.
We must make atonement for the still worse ones, which we do not read about in the papers, crimes that are shrouded in the silence of the jungle night… Albert Schweitzer: Essential Writings.
(James Brabazon, ed., Orbis Books, 2005. pp.
76-80.

", which Achebe criticized him for, though Achebe seems to acknowledge that Schweitzer's use of the word "brother" at all was, for a European of the early 20th century, an unusual expression of human solidarity between whites and blacks.
Later in his life, Schweitzer was quoted as saying "The time for speaking of older and younger brothers has passed."
Albert Schweitzer spent most of his life in Lambaréné in what is now Gabon, Africa.

She recalled, 'It was all full of the magic of the African forest, the moonlight in the jungle and on the river, the merry gambols of the little monkeys in the trees when the sun is shining...' (G. Seaver, Albert Schweitzer, The Man and his Mind, 4th edn, London 1951, 63-64, 112-113, 139-152).

During 1934 and 1935 he was for some time in Britain, delivering the Gifford Lectures at Edinburgh, and those on Religion in Modern Civilization at Oxford and London.
He had originally conducted trials for recordings for HMV on the organ of the old Queen's Hall in London.
These records did not satisfy him, the instrument being too harsh.
In mid-December 1935 he began to record for Columbia Records on the organ of All-Hallows-by-the-Tower, Barking (London).
Then at his suggestion the sessions were transferred to the church of Ste Aurélie in Strasbourg, on a mid-18th century organ by Johann Andreas Silbermann (an organ-builder greatly revered by Bach), which had been restored by the Lorraine organ-builder Frédéric Härpfer shortly before the First World War.
These recordings were made in the course of a fortnight in October 1936.

His discs included altogether 25 records of Bach and 8 of César Franck.
The Bach titles were mainly distributed as follows:All Hallows: Prelude and Fugue in C major; Fantasia and Fugue in G minor (the Great); Prelude and Fugue in G major; Prelude and Fugue in F minor; Little Fugue in G minor; Toccata and Fugue in D minor.
(Columbia ROX 146-152).Ste Aurélie: Prelude and Fugue in C minor; Prelude and Fugue in E minor; Toccata and Fugue in D minor; Schmücke dich, O liebe Seele; O Mensch, bewein' dein Sünde groß; O Lamm' Gottes, unschuldig; Christus der uns selig macht; Da Jesus an dem Kreuze stand; An Waßerflüßen Babylon; Wenn wir in höchsten Nöten sein.
(Columbia ROX 8020-8023, 8032-8035, etc).
They were issued in albums, with a specially designed record label.
(Seaver 1951, op.cit.
; C R Joy, op.
cit, 226-230).