Most Jews consider Anti-Zionism to be a form of anti-Semitism.
Examples of where anti-Zionism has clearly been a veneer for for anti-Semitism include events in Poland, Czechoslovakia, and the former Soviet Union.
Some Anti-Semitism existed in Poland in 1956 when Gomulka rose to power, but only at minor levels.
His government was opposed to anti-Semitism.
During this time period many Jewish Poles were repatriated from the U.S.S.R., and many of them immigrated to the State of Israel or other nations.
However, in line with the official policy of the Soviet Union, after the Six Day War in 1967 the government of Poland turned against its Jewish citizens.
Gomulka publicly warned Jews against becoming a "fifth column" against Poland, and merely expressing sympath for israel was stated as reason to believe that someone was a traitor.
Thus, most Jews instantly became suspected of treason if they had expressed any support for Israel.
Immediately following this was an explostion of anti-Semitic books and articles filled with anti-Zionism, all carrying traditional anti-Semitic overtones.
Immediately following this was a nation-wide anti-Jewish purge, removing Jews from their jobs in the government, universities, and many other fields.
This purge was directed by the minister of the interior, and head of the security police, MieczysGaw Moczar.

Some Anti-Semitism existed in Czechoslovakia in the 1950s, but not much.
Tolerance towards Jews in this nation was traditional.
The situation began to change when strong differences emerged between the liberal regime in Prague and the more conservative Soviet Union.
By August 1968 the Soviet Union invaded Czechoslovakia to destroy the liberal regime, and the Soviet's instituted an anti-Zionist campaign against the nation's Jews.
Soviet propaganda claimed that Zionist attempted a "counter-revolution", which the Soviet Union had to save the nation from.
Immediately following this invasion Jews were purged from many government and university positions.

Many people consider Anti-Zionism to be a form of anti-Semitism.
To understand why this issue is so complicated, one must consider how most Jews define the word "Zionism", and how many non-Jews understand the word.
For the great majority of Jews, Zionism means only that the Jewish people, like all other peoples, have a right to a state of their own.
Just as Arabs have a right to have an Arab nation (there are in fact nearly two dozen ethnic Arab nations) and just as Japanese people have a right to have a Japanese nation, Jews have a right to one as well.
This is what some Jewish writers have termed "normalcy"; the goal of Jews to live as other peoples do all across the world.

Many people outside the state of Israel consider themselves Zionist, because being a Zionist only means that one supports the right of Jews to have a state; it does not necessarilly mean that one must emigrate to that state.
Some anti-Zionists claim that Zionism has something to do with race, which is totally incorrect: the State of Israel has allowed million of people of all races and skin colors to become Israeli citizens including Hispanics, Vietnamese, Yemenites, Druze, Bedouins, black Africans, etc.
In many ways, these false teachings about the nature of Zionism may be a sign of anti-Semitism itself.

One must realize that we can distinguish between anti-Zionism (which Jews hold to be anti-Semitic) and any specific criticism of the Israeli government or of a facet of Israeli society.
The latter by all reasonable definitions of the term cannot be considered anti-Semitic.
For instance, one can oppose the occupation of the West Bank without being an anti-Zionist.
Thus, although anti-Zionism often is the same as anti-semitism, a specific criticism of Israel is not anti-Semitism."

Most Jews hold that in the vast majority of cases ideological anti-Zionists are also anti-Semites, combining the two concepts in a way that cancels the distinction between them.
The conceptual denial of the right of Jews for a state is indicative of considering Jews inferior - which is exactly anti-Semitism.
Self-proclaimed anti-Zionists almost always fail to distinguish between Israel the state, and Israelis and Jews as individuals; this often leads to anti-Semitic demonization.

Some Anti-Semitism existed in Poland in 1956 when Gomulka rose to power, but only at minor levels.
His government was opposed to anti-Semitism.
During this time period many Jewish Poles were repatriated from the U.S.S.R., and many of them immigrated to the State of Israel or other nations.
However, in line with the official policy of the Soviet Union, after the Six-Day War of 1967 the government of Poland turned against its Jewish citizens.
Gomulka publicly warned Jews against becoming a "fifth column" against Poland, and merely expressing sympathy for Israel was stated as reason to believe that someone was a traitor.
Thus, most Jews instantly became suspected of treason if they had expressed any support for Israel.
Immediately following this was an explosion of anti-Semitic books and articles filled with anti-Zionism, all carrying traditional anti-Semitic overtones.
Immediately following this was a nation-wide anti-Jewish purge, removing Jews from their jobs in the government, universities, and many other fields.
This purge was directed by the minister of the interior, and head of the security police, MieczysGaw Moczar.

Some Anti-Semitism existed in Czechoslovakia in the 1950s, but not much.
Tolerance towards Jews in this nation was traditional.
The situation began to change when strong differences emerged between the liberal regime in Prague and the more conservative Soviet Union.
By August 1968 the Soviet Union invaded Czechoslovakia to destroy the liberal regime, and the Soviet's instituted an anti-Zionist campaign against the nation's Jews.
Soviet propaganda claimed that Zionist attempted a "counter-revolution", which the Soviet Union had to save the nation from.
Immediately following this invasion Jews were purged from many government and university positions.
Many people in fringe groups, such as Neo-Nazi parties and Hamas claim that the true aim of Zionism is world dominance; they call this the Zionist conspiracy and use this to support anti-Semitism.
The idea of a Zionist conspiracy is one of the oldest conspiracy theories.
This position has historically been associated with Fascism and Nazism.
The most important text in this regard may be the false document the Protocols of the Elders of Zion.

Anti-Semitism, sponsored by church and state, is abundant in many Arab Middle-Eastern countries, even those with which Israel has followed a path of normalization.
For instance, in Ramadan 2002, the Egyptian state television aired the series "Knight without a Horse", based on the Protocols of the Elders of Zion.
Saudi Arabia forbids the entry of Jews onto its territory; the Palestinian Authority has sponsored the sale of anti-Semitic and Holocaust-denying materials.

There are two major causes of anti-Semitism in the modern Middle East: the religious and the nationalistic.
Some Muslims resent Jews and Israel for religious reasons.
Examples include followers of the Shi'ite movement of Iran and Lebanon, and followers of the Wahabi School of Saudi Arabia.
According to their tractation of the Islamic law, all lands fall into one of only two possible legal categories (A) Land currently under Islamic control, and (B) Land once controlled by Muslims, that all Muslims worldwide are bound to re-conquer; such lands, including the State of Israel and Spain, are termed "lands under the sword".

The second cause is nationalistic: as in many other countries (for instance the 19th century Russia), a rise in nationalism is accompanied by increased xenophobia.
The grievances caused to Arabs during the Arab-Israeli conflict give these feelings a powerful boost; Israel and Jews are often demonized - up to the extent that blood libel theories are routinely revived by Arab television networks.
Some advocates explain the bitterness of Palestinian Arabs as a natural response to what they call unfair expulsion from "their country", an argument which presumes that all of the land on which Israel was created was rightfully "theirs" (see Palestinian homeland).

Themost common form of this attack is the claim that "Jews view all criticisms of the State of Israel as anti-Semitic", and then conclude that Jews are untustrworthy or irrational, as they constantly bring forth false accusations of racism.
In point of fact, no Jewish organization holds that criticism of the State of Israel is a form of anti-Semitism.
In contrast to the myth, most Jewish groups themselves have criticised the State of Israel on various issues, and Jewish groups have very good relations with many non-Jewish groups that have offered criticisms of Israel.

The Anti-Defamation League states that "Criticism of particular Israeli actions or policies in and of itself does not constitute anti-Semitism.
Certainly the sovereign State of Israel can be legitimately criticized just like any other country in the world.
However, it is undeniable that there are those whose criticism of Israel or of Zionism is used to mask anti-Semitism.
How can one distinguish between criticism of Israel that is within the bounds of legitimate political discourse, and that which crosses the line into anti-Semitism?
One way is to recognize when those that criticize Israel invoke traditional anti-Jewish references, accusations and conspiracy theories.... Another common theme is when Israelis are compared to Nazis and Hitler.
This comparison between the Jewish state and those who perpetrated the greatest and largest act of anti-Semitism in world history is not an impartial or dispassionate accusation....To make such a comparison is such an act of blatant hostility toward Jews and Jewish history, that it clearly bespeaks of a deeper hatred.
Finally, deeper bias against Israel and Jews may be evident when Israel is held to a different standard than any other country in the world.
Such an example is when anti-Israel statements question or deny Israel's right to exist...Similarly, when Israel is singled out for criticism for actions or policies that other nations around the world perform with impunity, questions of motivation arise.

See the article on Anti-Semitism in Poland for a discussion of this subject.
Since 2000 anti-Semitism has been on a startling rise in France.
According to many groups with monitor bias crimes, the amount of anti-Semitic incidents in France is now even greater than in the years immediately preceding the Holocaust.

The annual National Consultative Commission on Human Rights (NCCHR) report on racism and xenophobia describes and documents such incidents.
There were 743 anti-Semitic incidents of violence and threats in 2000, and 200 anti-Semitic incidents of violence and threats in 2001.
For example, on October 10, 2000, a synagogue in Trappes was set on fire and destroyed.
Between October 12 and 14, 2000, local authorities in Strasbourg uncovered several Molotov cocktails that had been planted in a synagogue.
On October 14, 2000, a synagogue in Lyon was rammed by a car and then caught fire.
Three synagogues in the Paris suburb of Bagnolet and a Jewish shop in Toulon were firebombed.
On October 17, 2000, six incendiary devices were discovered outside a Jewish school in Paris.
On October 23, 2000, a synagogue in Marseille was firebombed.

During the first 6 months of 2002, there was a huge increase in attacks, ranging from graffiti and harassment to cemetery desecration and firebombing, mainly perpetrated by French Muslims.
According to the press, the French police reported close to 400 incidents during the 2-week period of March 29 through April 17, 2002.
The most serious incidents occurred over the Easter-Passover weekend: On March 30, a synagogue was damaged by fire in a suburb of Strasbourg; on March 31, a synagogue and adjoining library in Marseille were burned to the ground and a second was attacked 2 days later; in March in Toulouse, there was a drive-by shooting of a Kosher butcher shop; on April 7, assailants threw gasoline bombs at a synagogue north of Paris; and in April in Lyon, 15 masked assailants smashed 2 cars into a synagogue and set it on fire.
On April 10, a group of youths armed with baseball bats attacked and robbed young Jewish soccer players.

Government leaders, members of the Jewish community, the Paris and Marseille Grand Mosques, the Protestant Federation, and the French Conference of Bishops strongly criticized the violence.
The French government increased security for Jewish institutions.
More than 13 mobile units, totaling more than 1,200 officers, have been assigned to those locales having the largest Jewish communities.
In April 2002, the Marseille prefecture instituted 24-hour patrols at all of the city's Jewish sites.

The term anti-Semitism has its origin in the ethnological theory that the Jews, as Semites, are entirely different from the Aryan, or Indo-European, populations and can never be amalgamated with them.
The word implies that the Jews are not opposed on account of their religion, but on account of their racial characteristics.
As such are mentioned: greed, a special aptitude for money-making, aversion to hard work, clannishness and obtrusiveness, lack of social tact, and especially of patriotism.
Finally, the term is used to justify resentment for every crime or objectionable act committed by any individual Jew.

In 1874 David Kaufmann spoke of the ethnic theory of Semitism as "allerneueste Weisheit" ("Magazin f체r die Literatur des Auslandes," 1874, No.
44), and Ludwig Bamberger, in his essay, "Deutschtum u. Judentum ("Unsere Zeit," 1880, i.
194), said, "The war-cry against the Semites is, as the word indicates, of very recent date."
In his memoirs, too, referring to 1858 or shortly before, Bamberger says that the word "Semitism" had not then been invented ("Erinnerungen," ii.
311, Berlin, 1899).
In February 1881, a correspondent of the "Allgemeine Zeitung des Judenthums" speaks of "Anti-Semitism" as a designation which recently came into use ("Allg.
Zeit.
d.
Jud."
1881, p. 138).
On July 19, 1882, the editor says, "This quite recent Anti-Semitism is hardly three years old" (ib.
1882, p. 489).

Most anti-Semites are opposed to Zionism.
Historically, however, there were anti-Semites who supported Zionism as a means of emptying their country of Jews; this is uncommon today.
Some anti-Zionists are also anti-Semites.
In the popular media of the Arab Middle East, the terms "Israeli", "Zionist" and "Jew" are often used interchangeably, indicating a conjoining of anti-Zionism and anti-Semitism.
The conflation of the three terms is false, as there exist non-Israeli Jews, and non- and anti-Zionist Jews.

Most Jews hold that in the vast majority of cases ideological anti-Zionists are also anti-Semites, combining the two concepts in a way that cancels the distinction between them.
They hold that the unconditional denial of the right of Jews to a state implies considering Jews inferior as to rights -- which is anti-Semitism by definition.
They further hold that self-proclaimed anti-Zionists almost always fail to distinguish between Israel the state, and Israelis and Jews as individuals; this often leads to anti-Semitic demonization.

Jews distinguish between anti-Zionism and specific criticisms of the Israeli government, or of a facet of Israeli society.
For instance, most Israelis and Jews hold that one can oppose the occupation of the West Bank without being anti-Zionist.
Anti-Zionism is recognized as anti-Semitism when groups repeatedly and publicly criticise the State of Israel for a specific policy, yet fail to do the same for other nations which have the same policy.

Until 1965, for instance, the Catholic Church preached that "the wicked Jews", as a people, were collectively responsible for the death of Jesus Christ.
Many Protestant Christian denominations still teach this.

Most anti-Semites are opposed to Zionism.
Historically, however, there were anti-Semites who supported Zionism as a means of emptying their country of Jews; this is uncommon today.
Some anti-Zionists are also anti-Semites.
In the popular media of the Arab Middle East, the terms "Israeli", "Zionist" and "Jew" are often used interchangeably, indicating a conjoining of anti-Zionism and anti-Semitism.
The conflation of the three terms is false, as there exist non-Israeli Jews, and non- and anti-Zionist Jews.

Most Jews hold that in the vast majority of cases ideological anti-Zionists are also anti-Semites, combining the two concepts in a way that cancels the distinction between them.
They hold that the unconditional denial of the right of Jews to a state implies considering Jews inferior as to rights -- which is anti-Semitism by definition.
They further hold that self-proclaimed anti-Zionists almost always fail to distinguish between Israel the state, and Israelis and Jews as individuals; this often leads to anti-Semitic demonization.

Jews distinguish between anti-Zionism and specific criticisms of the Israeli government, or of a facet of Israeli society.
For instance, most Israelis and Jews hold that one can oppose the occupation of the West Bank without being anti-Zionist.
Anti-Zionism is recognized as anti-Semitism when groups repeatedly and publicly criticise the State of Israel for a specific policy, yet fail to do the same for other nations which have the same policy.

(to be written) Holocaust, Warsaw Ghetto,  An Antisemite that oppose the holocaust Protest of Zofia Kossak-Szczucka etc... Main article: Anti-Zionism and anti-Semitism Islam in and of itself is not Anti-Semitic, although the Qur'an criticizes both Jewish law for allegedly being corrupted, and Jewish people for allegedly not adhering to their religion.
Islam is similiar and compatible with Judaism, as both see themselves as descendants of Abraham and followers of the same prophets.
Islamic scholars are quick to point out that Islam encourages toleration and respect for Jewish people, as they are considered "People of the Book," meaning they share common scriptures and prophets.
Many people have produced hadith concerning Muhammad that showed how he did business with the Jewish tribes of his city and how he ordered Muslims to share food with Jewish neighbors.

Historically there has not been as much anti-Semitism from Muslim lands as from Christian lands, up until the Twentieth century.
While many Jewish people were persecuted in Europe, they enjoyed relative political and religious freedom in Islamic societies.
Moorish Spain was controlled by Muslims for approximately 700 years, and during that time, Jewish citizens had rights nearly equal to that of American citizens today.
Jewish historians refer to that time period as "The Golden Age of Judaism."

Jewish people also gained prominence in the courts of Baghdad, Cairo, and Istanbul, performing the duties of palace physicians, finance officers, and even government ministers known as "viziers.'
As a minority, Jewish people were exempt from Jewish law, and the governments allowed them a degree of self-rule by appointing Jewish leaders to implement Jewish law for their communities.
Important synagogues dot the major cities of the Middle east, and relations between Muslims and Jewish people have been relatively calm for over a thousand years.

Anti-Semitism in the Muslim world rose greatly in the twentieth century.
This can be traced to various sources; some of it can be traced to long-held prejudices and historical misunderstandings.
The main reason for the rise of anti-Semitism in the past century is the poor state of relations between Israel, a Jewish-majority state, and the neighboring Arab countries.
Criticism of Israeli policy has led to distrust of Jewish people and anti-Semitism on the popular level.
Holocaust revisionists often claim that "the Jews" or a "Zionist conspiracy" is responsible for the exaggeration or wholesale fabrication of the events of the Holocaust.

In a report to the first United Nations conference devoted to anti-Semitism on June 21, 2004, the Secretary General Kofi Annan noted "alarming resurgence" of anti-Semitism in the world: "It is clear that we are witnessing an alarming resurgence of this phenomenon in new forms and manifestations," Annan said.
"This time the world must not, cannot be silent.
",

In his article Human Rights and the New Anti-Jewishness, Irwin Cotler, the new Minister of Justice for Canada, defines thirteen indices of discrimination against Jews that characterizes the "new anti-Jewishness".
Cotler states:  Some hold that one of the new forms of anti-Semitism is the claim that Jews view all criticisms of Israel or of Zionism as anti-Semitic.
Jews are then branded as being overly sensitive, or as dishonest.
In this view, Jewish groups are falsely crying wolf, which attracts a hatred against them.
This argument undercuts any statement by any Jew, as one can then claim that it is the Jews who cause anti-Semitism.
According to many Jewish groups, this argument is anti-Semitic, as it depends on false claims and is used to conclude that Jews bring anti-Semitism upon themselves.
Genocidal anti-Semitism is the public call for the destruction of Israel and the Jewish people.
Examples include the covenants of some terrorist organizations which publicly call for the destruction of Israel and the killing of Jews anywhere.
The denial of the Jewish people to have a form of self-determination, or nationalism, while simultaneously allowing other peoples, such as Arabs and Kurds, to have their own forms of nationalism.
The belief that all forms of Zionism are racist, and that Israel is an apartheid state that must be removed, is labelled "ideological anti-Semitism" by some.
This refers to the teaching among certain bodies that Judaism is inherently deceitful, evil, and is the enemy of Islam in the Middle-East.
Cultural anti-Semitism refers to what is seen by some as a growing acceptance of public anti-Semitism in universities, in parliaments, among the literate, public intellectuals, and the human rights movement.

Treating Israel in a way different from all other nations is considered to be one of the facets of the new anti-Semitism by many Jewish groups, but there is not yet any substantial proof that this occurs in reality except for the claims brought forward by special-interest groups.
Holocaust denial is another facet of the new anti-Semitism.
Terrorism against Jews.

In the twentieth century, the most visible forms of anti-Semitism were:The American radio talk-show host Dennis Prager believes that the root cause of anti-Semitism is that Jews are socially and culturally different from the societies that they live in; in most eras Jews have not let themselves become assimilated into the majority culture.
This led to belief that the Jews believed themselves superior to others, resulting in prejudice against Jews.
Such phenomenon existed in ancient Egypt, ancient Persia, and in the ancient Roman Empire.
While other conquered peoples assimilated and joined the religion of the majority, Jews retained their religious and cultural heritage.

Cotler states: A number of political and social leaders in the European Union have become concerned with the new wave of anti-Semitism that is sweeping over Europe.
As such, a report on this phenomenon was written at the Center for Research on Anti-Semitism, at the Technische Universit채t Berlin, Germany.
This report was written on behalf of the European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia (EUMC.)
The February 2003 version of this report is available online

United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan stated on June 21, 2004, that "It is hard to believe that 60 years after the tragedy of the Holocaust, anti-Semitism is once again rearing its head.
But it is clear that we are witnessing an alarming resurgence of these phenomena in new forms and manifestations.
This time the world must not, cannot, be silent."
Ana then asked U.N. member states to adopt a resolution to fight anti-Semitism, and stated that the UN's Commission on Human Rights must study and expose anti-Semitism in the same way that it fights bias against Muslims.
Anan stated "Are not Jews entitled to the same degree of concern and protection?"

A number of political and social leaders in the European Union have become concerned with the new wave of anti-Semitism that is sweeping over Europe.
As such, a report on this phenomenon was written at the Center for Research on Anti-Semitism, at the Technische Universit채t Berlin, Germany.
This report was written on behalf of the European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia (EUMC.)
The February 2003 version of this report is available online A number of researchers on anti-Semitism have written book-length treatments about this subject, including The New Anti-Semitism: The Current Crisis and What We Must Do About It, Phyllis Chesler (Jossey-Bass, 2003); The Return of Anti-Semitism by Gabriel Schoenfeld, Encounter Books, 2003; and Never Again?
The Threat of the New Anti-Semitism]] by Abraham Foxman, HarperSanFrancisco, 2003.

United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan stated on June 21, 2004, that "It is hard to believe that 60 years after the tragedy of the Holocaust, anti-Semitism is once again rearing its head.
But it is clear that we are witnessing an alarming resurgence of these phenomena in new forms and manifestations.
This time the world must not, cannot, be silent."
Anan then asked U.N. member states to adopt a resolution to fight anti-Semitism, and stated that the UN's Commission on Human Rights must study and expose anti-Semitism in the same way that it fights bias against Muslims.
Anan stated "Are not Jews entitled to the same degree of concern and protection?"

According to (???)
none of the above cited books are objective.
According to (???)
all the above sources contain factual distortion and rhetoric masking political agendas, which has given rise to the publication of several opposing views as well.

On many occasions, Jews were accused of a blood libel, the supposed drinking of blood of Christian children in mockery of the Christian Eucharist.
According to the authors of these blood libels, the "procedure" for the alleged sacrifice was something like this: a child who had not yet reached puberty, was kidnapped and taken to a hidden place.
The child would be tortured by Jews, and a crowd would gather at the place of execution (in some accounts the synagogue itself) and engage in a mock tribunal to try the child.
The boy would be presented to the tribunal naked and tied; he would eventually be condemned to death.
In the end, the boy would be crowned with thorns and tied or nailed to a wooden cross.
The cross would be raised and the blood dripping from the boy's wounds, would be caught in bowls or glasses.
Finally, the boy would be killed with a thrust through the heart from a spear, sword, or dagger.
His dead body would be removed from the cross and concealed or disposed of, but in some instances rituals of black magic would be performed on it.
This method, with some variations, can be found in all the alleged descriptions of ritual murder by Jews.

The story of William of Norwich (d. 1144) is the first known case of ritual murder being alleged by a Christian monk.
It does not mention the collection of William's blood for any purpose.
The story of Little Saint Hugh of Lincoln (d. 1255) said that after the boy was dead, his body was removed from the cross and laid on a table.
His belly was cut open and his entrails removed for some occult purpose, such as a divination ritual.
The story of Simon of Trent (d. 1475) highly stressed how the boy was held on a large bowl so all his blood could be collected.

Many blood libel accusations and trials of Jews took place during 1250 CE to 1840 CE.
A famous example was one in England, 1255, the case of Little Saint Hugh of Lincoln resulted in the execution of 19 Jews.
In Englan, 1475, Simon of Trent, aged two, disappeared, and his father alleged that he had been kidnapped and murdered by the local Jewish community.
Fifteen local Jews were sentenced to death and burned.
Simon was regarded as a saint, and was canonized by Pope Sixtus V in 1588.
His status as a saint was removed in 1965 by Pope Paul VI, though his murder is still promoted as a fact by a handful of extremists.
In Kiev, Russia, 191, a Jewish factory manager, Mendel Bailis, was accused of murdering a Christian child and using his blood in matzos.
He was acquitted by an all-Christian jury after a sensational trial in 1913.
Int he 20th century, blood libel stories have appeared a number of times in the state-sponsored media of a number of Arab nations, in Arab television shows, and on websites.

Martin Luther, founder of Protestant Christianity, was at first friendly towards the Jewish community, believing that the evils of Catholicism had prevented their conversion to Christianity.
When he discovered that Jews did not find the Protestant form of Christianity any more congenial, he became hostile to them instead and preached that they were "venomous beats, vipers, disgusting scum, canders, devils incarnate.
Their private houses must be destroyed and devastated, they could be lodged in stables.
Let the magistrates burn their synagogues and let whatever escapes be covered with sand and mud.
Let them force to work, and if this avails nothing, we will be compelled to expel them like dogs in order not to expose ourselves to incurring divine wrath and eternal damnation from the Jews and their lies."
Pope Clement VIII (1536-1605) helped promulgate classical anti-Semitism in the Catholic community.
In his words, "All the world suffers from the usury of the Jews, their monopolies and deceit.
They have brought many unfortunate people into a state of poverty, especially the farmers, working class people and the very poor.

Many historians hold that Nazi semitism was based in traditional Christian anti-Semitism.
The following are examples of Christian beliefs towards Jews that became Nazi policy.
See the main article on the Holocaust for a complete treatment of the subject.
Also see the related articles on the Warsaw Ghetto, and the Protest of Zofia Kossak-Szczucka.

On many occasions, Jews were accused of a blood libel, the supposed drinking of blood of Christian children in mockery of the Christian Eucharist.
According to the authors of these blood libels, the "procedure" for the alleged sacrifice was something like this: a child who had not yet reached puberty, was kidnapped and taken to a hidden place.
The child would be tortured by Jews, and a crowd would gather at the place of execution (in some accounts the synagogue itself) and engage in a mock tribunal to try the child.
The boy would be presented to the tribunal naked and tied; he would eventually be condemned to death.
In the end, the boy would be crowned with thorns and tied or nailed to a wooden cross.
The cross would be raised and the blood dripping from the boy's wounds, would be caught in bowls or glasses.
Finally, the boy would be killed with a thrust through the heart from a spear, sword, or dagger.
His dead body would be removed from the cross and concealed or disposed of, but in some instances rituals of black magic would be performed on it.
This method, with some variations, can be found in all the alleged descriptions of ritual murder by Jews.

The story of William of Norwich (d. 1144) is the first known case of ritual murder being alleged by a Christian monk.
It does not mention the collection of William's blood for any purpose.
The story of Little Saint Hugh of Lincoln (d. 1255) said that after the boy was dead, his body was removed from the cross and laid on a table.
His belly was cut open and his entrails removed for some occult purpose, such as a divination ritual.
The story of Simon of Trent (d. 1475) highly stressed how the boy was held on a large bowl so all his blood could be collected.

Many blood libel accusations and trials of Jews took place during 1250 CE to 1840 CE.
A famous example was one in England, 1255, the case of Little Saint Hugh of Lincoln resulted in the execution of 19 Jews.
In Englan, 1475, Simon of Trent, aged two, disappeared, and his father alleged that he had been kidnapped and murdered by the local Jewish community.
Fifteen local Jews were sentenced to death and burned.
Simon was regarded as a saint, and was canonized by Pope Sixtus V in 1588.
His status as a saint was removed in 1965 by Pope Paul VI, though his murder is still promoted as a fact by a handful of extremists.
In Kiev, Russia, 1911, a Jewish factory manager, Mendel Bailis, was accused of murdering a Christian child and using his blood in matzos.
He was acquitted by an all-Christian jury after a sensational trial in 1913.
Int he 20th century, blood libel stories have appeared a number of times in the state-sponsored media of a number of Arab nations, in Arab television shows, and on websites.

For more information please see the article on the blood libel, and the List of blood libels against Jews.
Host desecration is an anti-Semitic myth similar to the blood libel myth.
It started in late 13th century England and France (a century after Christians started making blood libel accusations against Jews), where people claimed that Jews would steal consecrated host wafers and torture them.
According to the theory of transubstantiation, a consecrated host wafer became the flesh of Jesus, so it was believed that Jews would steal and torture these wafers to reenact Jesus's crucifixion.
This myth portrayed Jews in an even worse light than the blood libels: rather than killing a mere human, the Jews allegedly tortured what they believed to be the Messiah and the son of God.

See the articles on host desecration and Judensau for more information.
Martin Luther, founder of Protestant Christianity, was at first friendly towards the Jewish community, believing that the evils of Catholicism had prevented their conversion to Christianity.
When he discovered that Jews did not find the Protestant form of Christianity any more congenial, he became hostile to them instead and preached that they were "venomous beats, vipers, disgusting scum, canders, devils incarnate.
Their private houses must be destroyed and devastated, they could be lodged in stables.
Let the magistrates burn their synagogues and let whatever escapes be covered with sand and mud.
Let them force to work, and if this avails nothing, we will be compelled to expel them like dogs in order not to expose ourselves to incurring divine wrath and eternal damnation from the Jews and their lies."
Pope Clement VIII (1536-1605) helped promulgate classical anti-Semitism in the Catholic community.
In his words, "All the world suffers from the usury of the Jews, their monopolies and deceit.
They have brought many unfortunate people into a state of poverty, especially the farmers, working class people and the very poor.
Then, as now, Jews have to be reminded intermittently that they were enjoying rights in any country since they left Palestine and the Arabian desert, and subsequently their ethical and moral doctrines as well as their deeds rightly deserve to be exposed to criticism in whatever country they happen to live."
The Crusades were a series of several military campaigns sanctioned by the Papacy that took place during the 11th through 13th centuries.
They began as Catholic endeavors to capture Jerusalem from the Muslims but developed into territorial wars.

The initial conquest of Palestine by the forces of Islam in the 7th century did not interfere much with pilgrimage to Christian holy sites or the security of monasteries and Christian communities in the Holy Land.
However, in the year 1009 the Fatimid caliph of Cairo, al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah, had the Church of the Holy Sepulchre destroyed.
His successor permitted the Byzantine Empire to rebuild it, and pilgrimage was permitted again.
The decisive loss of the Byzantine army to the Seljuk Turks at the Battle of Manzikert in 1071 brought the beginning of Byzantine pleas for troops and support from the West.

The mobs accompanying the first three Crusades attacked the Jewish community in Germany, France, and England, and put many of them to death; this left behind for centuries strong feelings of ill will on both sides.
The social position of the Jews in western Europe was distinctly worsened by the Crusades, and legal restrictions became frequent during and after them.
They prepared the way for the anti-Jewish legislation of Pope Innocent III., and formed the turning-point in the medieval history of the Jews.

Many historians hold that Nazi semitism was based in traditional Christian anti-Semitism.
The following are examples of Christian beliefs towards Jews that became Nazi policy.
See the main article on the Holocaust for a complete treatment of the subject.
Also see the related articles on the Warsaw Ghetto, and the Protest of Zofia Kossak-Szczucka.

However, the cost of Edward's ambitions soon drained the money-lenders dry and when the Jews could no longer pay, they were accused of disloyalty.
Already restricted to a limited number of occupations, the Jews saw Edward abolish their "privilege" to lend money, choked their movements and activities and were forced to wear a yellow patch.
The heads of Jewish households were then arrested, over 300 of them taken to the Tower of London and executed, while others killed in their homes.
The complete banishment of all Jews from the country in 1290 led to thousands killed and drowned while fleeing and in absence of the Jews from England for three and a half centuries until 1655, when Oliver Cromwell reversed the policy.

In 1744, Frederick II The Great limited Breslau to ten "protected" Jewish families.
He encouraged this practice in other Prussian cities.
In 1750 he issued Revidiertes General Privilegium und Reglement vor die Judenschaft: the "protected" Jews had an alternative to "either abstain from marriage or leave Berlin" (quoting Simon Dubnow).
In the same year, Archduchess of Austria Maria Theresa ordered Jews out of Bohemia but soon reversed her position, on condition that Jews pay for readmission every ten years.
This extortion was known as malke-geld (queen's money).
In 1752 she introduced the law limiting each Jewish family to one son.
In 1782, Joseph II abolished most of persecution practices in his Toleranzpatent, on the condition that Yiddish and Hebrew are eliminated from public records and judicial autonomy is annulled.
Moses Mendelssohn wrote that "Such a tolerance... is even more dangerous play in tolerance than open persecution".

Desiring to emerge from the Dark Ages as a prominent European power, Poland took notice of the typically advanced education of Jews (particularly their literacy) and their competence in financial management.
In 1264, Polish King Boleslav legislated a charter for Jewish residence and protection, hoping that Jewish settlement would contribute to the development of the Polish economy.
Boleslav granted the Jews rights that were impressive in post-Crusades Europe.
These included recognition of legal testimony of Jews, fines for harming Jews or Jewish property, prohibition of blood libels, and equal commercial rights.
Due to the attractive opportunities Poland offered for Jews at the time, as well as extreme persecution and summary expulsion of Jewry from Spain, a burgeoning Jewish population developed in Poland.
Jews were allowed to open Yeshivas and had a measure of independence regarding judging religious legal cases.
By the sixteenth century, Poland had become the center of European Jewry.
At the onset of the seventeenth century, however, tolerancy began to give way to increased anti-Semitism.
Twentieth century historian Simon Dubnow, in his acclaimed History of the Jews in Poland and Russia, detailed: In 1628, King Sigismund III banned publication of Hebrew books, including the Talmud.
In the 1648-49 Ukrainian Haidamak uprising against Polish szlachta, in which as many as 200,000 Jews were slaughtered, Polish peasants often participated in killing Jews (The Jews in Poland, Ken Spiro, 2001).
The besieged szlachta typically failed to protect Jews renting their land, in violation of "rental" contracts.
Historian Jacob Rader Marcus explained: Throughout the sixteenth and seventeenth century, the many of the szlachta mistreated Jews.
One rabbinical responsa from the 1680's details an account of a Polish suzerain taking hostage the community rabbi and Jewish council for the sake of capturing a Jewish girl.
A Polish peasant had claimed that the girl had agreed to marry him, despite her vehement denials (Beit Hillel, Rabbi Hillel ben Naftali Hertz).
Threat of mob violence was a specter over the Jewish communities in Poland at the time.
On one occasion in 1696, a mob threatened to massacre the Jewish community of Posin, Vitebsk.
The mob accused the Jews of murdering a Pole.
At the last moment, a peasant woman emerged with the victim's clothes and confessed to the murder.
One notable example of actualized riots against Polish Jews is the rioting of 1716, during which many Jews lost their lives.
Later, in 1723, the Bishop of Gdansk instigated the massacre of hundreds of Jews.
John Toland, a prominent Enlightenment figure in Britain, wrote in 1714 that Polish Jews "are often exposed... to unspeakable Calamities."
The legendary Walentyn Potocki, a polish nobleman who converted to Judaism, is said to have been burned by auto da fe on May 24, 1749.
In 1757, at the instigation of Jacob Frank and his followers, the Bishop of Kamenetz-Podolsk forced the Jewish rabbis to participate in religious dispute with the quasi-Christian Frankists.
Among the other charges, the Frankists claimed that the Talmud was full of heresy against Catholocism.
The Catholic judges determined that the Frankists had won the debate, whereupon the Bishop levied heavy fines against the Jewish community and confiscated and burned all Jewish Talmuds.
Polish anti-Semitism during the seventeenth and eighteenth century was summed up by Issac de Pinto as follows: "Polish Jews... who are deprived of all the privilages of society... who are despised and reviled on all sides, who are often persecuted, always insulted.... That contempt which is heaped on them chokes up all the seeds of virtue and honour...." (Issac de Pinto, philosopher and economist, in a 1762 letter to Voltaire).

According to 2005 survey results by ADL, anti-Semitic attitudes remain common in Europe.
Over 30% of those surveyed indicated that Jews have too much power in business, with responses ranging from lows of 11% in Denmark and 14% in England to highs of 66% in Hungary, and over 40% in Poland and Spain.
The results of religious anti-Semitism also linger, with over 20% of European respondents agreeing that Jews were responsible for the death of Jesus, with Poland having the highest number of those agreeing, at 39%.

The Vienna-based European Union Monitoring Center (EUMC), for 2002 and 2003, identified France, Germany, the United Kingdom, Belgium, and The Netherlands as EU member countries with notable increases in incidents.
As these nations keep reliable and comprehensive statistics on anti-Semitic acts, and are engaged in combating anti-Semitism, their data was readily available to the EUMC.
Governments and leading public figures condemned the violence, passed new legislation, and mounted positive law enforcement and educational efforts.

In Western Europe, traditional far-right groups still account for a significant proportion of the attacks against Jews and Jewish properties; disadvantaged and disaffected Muslim youths increasingly were responsible for most of the other incidents.
In Eastern Europe, with a much smaller Muslim population, skinheads and others members of the radical political fringe were responsible for most anti-Semitic incidents.
Anti-Semitism remained a serious problem in Russia and Belarus, and elsewhere in the former Soviet Union, with most incidents carried out by ultra-nationalist and other far-right elements.
The stereotype of Jews as manipulators of the global economy continues to provide fertile ground for anti-Semitic aggression.

According to the 2005 US State Deparment Report on Global Anti-Semitism, anti-Semitism in Europe increased significantly in recent years.
Beginning in 2000, verbal attacks directed against Jews increased while incidents of vandalism (e.g. graffiti, fire bombings of Jewish schools, desecration of synagogues and cemeteries) surged.
Physical assaults including beatings, stabbings and other violence against Jews in Europe increased markedly, in a number of cases resulting in serious injury and even death.

Similarly, in the Middle East, anti-Zionist propaganda frequently adopts the terminology and symbols of the Holocaust to demonize Israel and its leaders.
This rhetoric often crosses the line separating the legitimate criticism of Israel and its policies to become anti-Semitic vilification posing as legitimate political commentary.
At the same time, Holocaust denial and Holocaust minimization efforts find increasingly overt acceptance as sanctioned historical discourse in a number of Middle Eastern countries.

The problem of anti-Semitism is not only significant in Europe and in the Middle East, but there are also worrying expressions of it elsewhere.
For example, in Pakistan, a country without a Jewish community, anti-Semitic sentiment fanned by anti-Semitic articles in the press is widespread.
This reflects the more recent phenomenon of anti-Semitism appearing in countries where historically or currently there are few or even no Jews.

There was and is no essential foundation for either of these contentions.
Religious prejudices reaching back to the dawn of history were reawakened by the modern anti-Semitic agitation, but they did not originate it, and they have not entirely controlled it.
The alleged racial divergence was, too, only a linguistic hypothesis on the physical evidence of which even contemporary anthropologists were not agreed (Topinard, Anthropologie, p. 444; Taylor, Origins of Aryans, cap.
i.
), and, even if it were proved, it had existed in Europe for so many centuries, and so many ethnic modifications had occurred on both sides, that it could not be accepted as a practical issue.
It is true that the ethnographical histories of the Jews and the nations of Europe had proceeded on widely diverging lines, but these lines did more than once cross each other and become interlaced.
Thus "Aryan" elements are at the beginning of both; European morals have been ineradicably semitized by Christianity, and the Jews have been Europeans for over a thousand years, during which their character has been modified and in some respects transformed by the ecclesiastical and civil polities of the nations among whom they have made their permanent home.

If the emancipated Jews were Europeans in virtue of the antiquity of their western settlements, and of the character impressed upon them by the circumstances of their European history, they none the less presented the appearance of a strange people to their Gentile fellow-countrymen.
They had been secluded in their ghettoes for centuries, and had consequently acquired a physical and moral physiognomy differentiating them in a measure from their former oppressors.
This peculiar physiognomy was, on its moral side, not essentially Jewish or even Semitic.
It was an advanced development of the main attributes of civilized life, to which Christendom in its transition from feudalism had as yet only imperfectly adapted itself.

The ghetto, which had been designed as a sort of quarantine to safeguard Christendom against the Jewish heresy, had in fact proved a storage chamber for a portion of the political and social forces which were destined to sweep away the last traces of feudalism from central Europe.
In the ghetto, the pastoral Semite, who had been made a wanderer by the destruction of his nationality, was steadily trained, through centuries, to become an urban European, with all the entrepreneurial activities of urban economics, and all the democratic tendencies of occidental industrialism.
Excluded from the army, the land, the trade corporations and the artisan gilds, this quondam oriental peasant was gradually transformed into a commercial middleman and a practised dealer in money.
Oppressed by the Church, and persecuted by the State, his theocratic and monarchical traditions lost their hold on his daily life, and he became saturated with a passionate devotion to the ideals of democratic politics.
Finally, this former bucolic victim of Phoenician exploitation had his wits preternaturally sharpened, partly by the stress of his struggle for life, and partly by his being compelled in his urban seclusion to seek for recreation in literary exercises, chiefly the subtle dialectics of the Talmudists (Loeb, Juif de l'histoire; Jellinek, Der J체dische Stamm).

Unfortunately, these distinctive elements, though not very serious in themselves, became strongly accentuated by concentration.
Had it been possible to distribute the emancipated Jews uniformly throughout Christian society, as was the case with other emancipated religious denominations, there would have been no revival of the "Jewish question".
The Jews, however, through no fault of their own, belonged to only one class in European society--the industrial bourgeoisie.
Into that class all their strength was thrown, and owing to their ghetto preparation, they rapidly took a leading place in it, politically and socially.
When the mid-century revolutions made the bourgeoisie the ruling power in Europe, the semblance of a Hebrew domination presented itself.
It was the exaggeration of this apparent domination, not by the bourgeoisie itself, but by its enemies among the vanquished aristocratic reactionaries on the one hand, and by the extreme Radicals on the other, which created modern anti-Semitism as a political force.

Originally Japan had nothing to do with Anti-Semitism, but Nazi ideology and propaganda had some influence on Japanese people during World War II.
During the war, Minetaro Yamanaka, juvenile novelist, wrote stories that Japanese heroes knock Jewish conspirators down.
In 1973, a book named "밤⒲밤鸚㏛鼇" (Nostradamus no daiyogen; "The great prophecy of Nostradamus") became one of the best sellers.
This book is based on "The Protocols of the Learned Elders of Zion".
The author, Goto Ben, is from a traditional Russian-Orthodox family.
In 1986, a book named "╉ㅳ鰲ｃⓧ誤╉" 竊Yudaya ga wakaruto sekai ga mietekuru; "To watch Jews is to see the world clearly") became one of the best sellers.
This book is also based on "The Protocols of the Learned Elders of Zion", and the author, Uno Masami, is still insisting that the Ashkenazim are "fake Jews", and that the Zionists are controlling the world.
In 1995, a magazine named "Marco Polo" carried a Holocaust denial article by a doctor, Nishioka Masanori.
Simon Wiesenthal Center protested against this article, so the publisher apologized deeply, and decided to discontinue this magazine.

Aum Shinrikyo, which attacked Tokyo subways with sarin gas in 1995, was insisting the Jewish conspiracy theory.
They also intended to murder a Jewish TV producer, Dave Spector.
Goto Ben's books had great influences on Aum Shinrikyo.

The Jews from the Caucasus region are known as 'Mountain Jews' and these people are one of the oldest inhabitants of the region.
The distinct identity of Mountain Jews is believed to have crystallized by the eight century, which waves of Jewish immigrants began migrating to the Caucasus from Persia.
Members of the community spoke Dzhuhuri  a kind of Persian Yiddish  a Farsi dialect with a heavy mixture of Hebrew.
Unlike the other parts of the Caucasus, (like Georgia, Azerbaijan, Chechnya, Kabardino-Balkaria and Dagestan), however Armenia and Nagorno Karabakh had never had significant Jewish populations.
Although the Jews were known to live in Armenia in ancient times, most of them had emigrated from the region in the early years.
However, in the early 19th century they began arriving in the region mainly from Persia and Poland, creating Ashkenazic and Sephardic communities in the city of Yerevan.

After the 1917 Bolshevik Revolution the Armenian nationalists declared their independence in May 1918.
The relations between the Armenians and the Jews were relatively good during this period although the radicalism of the Armenian nationalists caused a short-term fear among the Jews.
However, when the Red Army defeated the Dashnaks (Armenian nationalists) Armenia became one of the Soviet republics under the communist system in 1921 for about seven decades.
The number of the Jewish community increased after the World War Two when Moscow sent a number of Jews from the different territories of the Union to Yerevan.
After the war the number of Jews was estimated over 5,000.
Despite the number of the Jews dramatically decreased in the 1970s and the 80s, the Jews maintained their position in Armenia as one of the major minorities.
In brief, the Jewish community had managed to survive, and thrive under the Muslim, Christian and communist rulers in Armenia until the end of the Soviet Union.

In the Soviet Union the Jewish population in Armenia was over 6.000 people.
The largest Jewish wave arrived in 1965 and 1972, mainly engineers and members of intelligentsia from Russia and Ukraine.
However their number declined in the 1970s and 80s as a result of the bad treatment, political reasons and economic catastrophes.
In 1991 independent Armenian Republic recognised the existence of the Jews in Armenia.
However for the Armenian Government, the Jews were in the guests status in the country like the Russians, Polish and Azerbaijanis.
Apart from the official mistrust towards the Jews, the revival of Armenian nationalism caused communal tension between the Armenians and the minorities.
The radical nationalists argued all foreign elements must be out by starting an Armenisation campaign.
In this campaign the central and local government encouraged the people to speak Armenian instead of speaking their native languages or other languages other than Armenian, like Russian, Turkish or Persian.

When the armed conflicts erupted and the Armenian forces entered the Azerbaijani territories the fears and mistrust towards foreigners and ethnically non-Armenians reached its peak in the country and some radical Armenians saw the Jewish minority as representatives of the evil forces in country, although the Jews did not betray their country during the conflicts.
As a result of the ethnic tension and economic problems the number of the Jews dramatically decreased in the 1990s.
The Jewish population in Armenia in 2000 down to about 1500, while the number of Jews in Karabagh was just 30.
The estimations for 2002 show that there are less than 1000 Jewish in Armenia.
The remained Jewish like their ancestors speak Armenian and do not know Hebrew.
Most of those who remained aim to immigrate to Israel or any Western state.
Those who cannot speak Hebrew go to the Sunday schools to learn Hebrew language because they hope Hebrew may helpful to become Israel citizens.

The Armenian Jewish had no problem with the state authority and showed their loyalty in many cases.
Most of the members of the community come from mixed marriage.
They have limited contact with any other foreign country.
Israel makes some financial assistance yet it is limited.
In another word, apart from the historical mistrust, there is no tangible basis for anti-Semitism.
In Armenia as mentioned above the main reason of anti-Semitism are foreign policy considerations and need to blame a group for the economic and political failure.
Because of this, those who use anti-Semitism as a tool in their policy, target an imaginary Jewish enemy.
For this group there is a Jewish conspiracy against Armenia and Armenians.
This conspiracy, to them, includes Israel and the Jewish lobbies based in the United States, Europe, Turkey and Russia and uses the Jewish minority in Armenia as well.
Igor Muradyans article appeared in Golos Armenii (Voice of Armenia) in April 1999, which is one of the vivid examples of the anti-Semitic publications in Armenia, reflects the main idea of this group.
Muradyan in his article claims that Armenian-Jewish relations have historically been filled conflict between Aryan Armenians and Semitic Jews.
Igor Muradyan further blames Jews for inciting ethnic conflicts in the region, including the dispute over Nagorno-Karabagh.
According to Muradyans view the greatest threat to Armenia posed by the close ties between Turkey and Israel.
Interestingly Muradyan argues that Turkeys founding fathers were Young Turks and they were Masonic with very good relations with the Jews.

Another example happened in November 1997.
Ara Saakian, the Vice-Speaker of the Armenian National Assembly announced the danger of the Jewish lobby and its plans over Armenia.
Saakian at that time was supporting the ratification of the pact for allowing a Russian military base in Armenia and he accused those, who opposed any foreign military base in Armenia, as agents of the greater anti-Armenian lobby.
For Ara Saakian the people who opposed ratification were playing into hands of the Jewish lobby.
It is interesting that the number of those who opposed the ratification was just four parliamentarians.

Saakians speech caused a hot debate in Armenia over the Jewish problem.
First response came from the Russian-language newspaper Golos Armenii.
Narek Mesropian, on 3 May 1997, in his When Brother Acts Against Brother article focused on the so-called Jewish issue:

Ara Saakian even mentioned the Jewish problem.
It is very painful problem, by the way.
And it is so not only in Russia.
In short, he sharply criticized the Jewish lobby, which allegedly disregarded all the rules of decency to profit from the oil of Baku.
And the Jewish lobby turned into a pro-Azerbaijan power Furthermore, it is well known that Ara Saakian, as one of the leaders of the Armenian National Movement, naturally considers himself among the so-called democrats And all the Russian democrats are either Jews or controlled by the Jews╈

It is in our blood to hate the Turks.
However, we hate Bulgarians and Greeks also.
The Jews like Turks, but they hate Arabs.
The Arabs, in their turn, are not in favour with the Turks.
And the level of hatred is rising.

Furthermore, The Ajzm, weekly publication of the National Democratic Union, in its response to Oskanian accused the Armenian authorities.
The Ajzm on 13 May 1997 published an article titled They Say Jew, They Understand a Representative of the West.
In this article the unnamed author argued that the Armenian authorities mean Jews when they speak about West and perceive the Jews as identical with the concepts of the West, United States, MOSSAD or CIA.
From Mistrust to Anti-Semitism: Armenian Book Denies Holocaust

The most recent example of the Armenian mistrust towards the Jews shows the anti-Semitic understanding behind the Jewish sceptic groups; as the JTA reported an anti-Semitic book National System was distributed in the early days of 2002.
The book identifies Jews and Turks as the leading enemies of the Armenian nation.
According to the National System the Holocaust is a myth, which was created by the Zionists.
The leader of Armenian Jewry at the 9 February gathering said, they are going to meet with Armenian President about the rising anti-Semitism in Armenia, yet the officials made no statement about the book and the anti-Semitic movements in the country.

In addition to the mistrust towards the Jewish minority inside, the scepticism against Israel and the Jewish lobbies is significant in Armenian foreign policy.
As will be detailed below Armenia first of all has developed close ties with Israels enemies, namely Iran and Syria.
Armenia even signed a military co-operation agreement with Syria.
Second, Armenian decision makers have perceived the Israeli and Jewish initiatives in the region against their national interest.
Vartan Oskanian, Armenian Foreign Minister, for instance argued Israeli and Armenian interests are diametrically opposed in the Caucasus region.
According to Oskanian the main reasons for this are Israels alliance with Turkey, and Israels interest in getting Azeri oil out to the Western market.

The Armenian policy makers in general perceive that the Jewish lobby in the United States is so strong and dominates the US Congress and the White House.
Even the Armenian press frequently claim that the Jewish lobby blackmails the US administration to protect the Israeli interests.
According to this view the Jewish lobby determines the American foreign policy regarding the region and the Jewish Americans favoured Azerbaijan because of oil and other reasons.
b. Karabakh: Only Armenians Are Full-Fledged Citizens

During the Soviet Union period, the Nagorna Karabakh in Azerbaijan was one of the ethnic and religious tolerance havens for the Soviet Jews.
Thousands of Jews from Russia, Ukraine, Belarus and other parts of the Soviet Union arrived in Karabakh of Azerbaijan to escape anti-Semitism.
Despite the majority was Armenian, the Azerbaijani administration had allowed the Jews to live their religion and culture freely and they had a close connection with the Jewish organisations in Baku, the capital of Azerbaijan.
As mentioned the majority of the Karabakh Jews had flocked in the region in order to escape persecution.
The second reason was to find a job.
The mixed-marriages was another reason for coming in Karabakh for the Jewish community.
The community had no problem neither with the other minorities (Russians, Polish and Azerbaijanis) nor the Armenians.
However, anti-Semitism erupted with the rise of the Armenian separatist nationalism in Karabakh against the Azerbaijani rule.

For the Armenian nationalists all non-Armenian people were foreigner or guest in the Armenian territory.
Maria Spector Groisman, who escaped from Ukraine to Karabakh, summarises the change; she says the life for the Jewish community there was relatively easy in the 1970s and 1980s, and they lived a relatively open Jewish life, they even received regular packages from the Star of David association in Baku.
But, she says when the wave of Armenian nationalism grown life became harder for the Karabakh Jews.
Many Jews emigrated to Israel in the 1970s.
Groisman recalls that Karabakhi nationalists had threatened to have Groisman fired from her job as a telephone operator unless she wrote an article describing the wretched conditions experienced by Soviet Jews in Israel and praising Armenian tolerance, and she said she had refused.

A mixed Jewish-Armenian couple, Alexander and Svetlana Peisakhov, lived in Stepanakert where their children, Sergei and Stella, were known as local prodigies.
However during four years of fighting, the childrens grandparents, Niusia and Gelta Sarkisian, kept them back from school and hid them in basement.
We would bury the dead at night because the heavy shelling during the day made it too dangerous said Nuisia Sarkisian.
We were scared because our children were not Armenians.
We did everything we could them out through Baku.

The Armenians won the war with the Russian military support and the Armenian forces occupied not only the Karabakh territories but also some other parts of Azerbaijan (over 20 % of all Azerbaijani territories).
In the words of Sverdlow, the Armenian victory and the war has ushered in a new era of chauvinism and intolerance to non-Armenians living in Nagorny Karabakh.
And the Jewish community has dwindled to just 30 people.
In this new era, the Jews had to hide their Jewish identity, because the ordinary Armenians think that Israel helps Azerbaijan and they perceive the Jewish community as the agents of the anti-Armenian West.
Sverdlow gives another significant example for discrimination against the Karabakh Jews:

When the war broke out in 1988, Daniel and Svetlana Groisman were living in Shushi, now Nagorny Karabakhs second largest town.
Daniel joined the Armenian army fought from 1990 until the ceasefire in 1994.
Says Svetlana, My husband helped retake Shushi.
So many fled during the war.
We arent even Armenian but we stayed and didnt betray Karabakh.
But now people call us Yids. After the war, the new government paid out compensation to veterans of the conflict but Daniel was denied the benefits awarded to pure-blooded Armenians.
When the city court confiscated the Groismans garage in 1998 and gave it to an ethnic Armenian veteran, the family was told Only Armenians are full-fledged citizens.
You should leave for Israel!

Apart from the homeland, the Armenians living in abroad shows mistrust towards the Jewish communities.
In the United States in particular the Armenian community perceive that the Jewish are manipulating the public opinion and decision making process against Armenia and Armenians.
The Jewish activities in the Congress are especially considered by the radical Armenians as a part of an anti-Armenian conspiracy.
The role of the Jewish representatives in blocking the Armenian resolutions are seen as proof for such a plan although the American State Department and the White House made it clear that the Armenian anti-Turkish attempts in the Congress damage the American national interests in the Middle East, the Balkans, and the Caucasus and the Armenian allegations are not based on the historical truth.
When the latest Armenian resolution failed in the Congress for example the radical Armenian political groups saw Israel, American Jewish community, CIA, Pentagon, State Department and President Bill Clinton as responsible for the failure.
Hagop Chakrian expressed this point of view in Asbarez, Armenian daily, on 27 July 2001:

The roots of anti-Semitism go back to the very begining of the existence of the semitic people's first organition into a nation state.
Even from the begining the Jewish state, Jewish here meaning strictly the children of Israel or Jacob, was misunderstood by its neighbors, and vise-versa, because of its then highly peculiar characteristics, e.g.: Its theocratic form of government, the monotheistic or henotheistic type of religion in particular.
This fact is attested to by the Torah itself calling the people of Isreal to be a "peculiar" people.
This "peculiarity" has been a source of misunderstanding on both sides of the anti-Semetic question from the very begining of Jewish history.
According to one of the sacred traditional texts of the Jews, the Torah, which represents the first major work of Monotheism, the Jews experienced persecution almost from the beginning of their existence as a nation.
According to tradition one of the Patriarch's of Israel named Jacob migrated to Egypt because of a great famine.
Upon arriving in Egypt he discovered that one of his sons, who he thought he had lost, was established in a position of power.
But after a short time the descendants of Jacob suffered in Egypt and were held in captivity as slaves.
After suffering under the oppressive rule of the Egyptian Pharaohs for some 400 years the Jews escaped from Egypt to form their own independent and sovereign nation.

To establish this new Jewish nation the Jews, under the provisions of Moses and later the leadership of Joseph entered the inhabited land of Canaan or ancient Palestine.
According to tradition the Jews were commanded by God to utterly destroy the culture, especially the religion, of the people inhabiting Canaan at that time as well as many of their cities.
Examples of this are the found throughout the books of Deuteronomy, Exodus, and the book of Joshua within the Torah which exists also within the Old Testament of the Christian's sacred literature.
It is during this time that the Jews developed their unique understanding of themselves as a "Nation unto God, set apart among the Nations..." and the doctrine that they have a special status among all races as "God's chosen people."
These doctrines have been the source of resentment toward the Jews and of the Jews towards other races up to the present day and continue to be a source of misunderstanding and strife.