Economy - overview: Azerbaijan is less developed industrially than either Armenia or Georgia, the other Caucasian states.
It resembles the Central Asian states in its majority Muslim population, high structural unemployment, and low standard of living.
The economy's most prominent products are oil, cotton, and natural gas.
Production from the Caspian oil field declined through 1997 but registered an increase in 1998-99.
Negotiation of 19 production-sharing arrangements (PSAs) with foreign firms, which have thus far committed $60 billion to oil field development, should generate the funds needed to spur future industrial development.
Oil production under the first of these PSAs, with the Azerbaijan International Operating Company, began in November 1997.
Azerbaijan shares all the formidable problems of the former Soviet republics in making the transition from a command to a market economy, but its considerable energy resources brighten its long-term prospects.
Baku has only recently begun making progress on economic reform, and old economic ties and structures are slowly being replaced.
An obstacle to economic progress, including stepped up foreign investment, is the continuing conflict with Armenia over the Nagorno-Karabakh region.
Trade with Russia and the other former Soviet republics is declining in importance while trade is building up with Turkey, Iran, UAE, and the nations of Europe.
Growth in 2000 should match growth in 1999.
Long-term prospects will depend on world oil prices and the location of new pipelines in the region.

Azerbaijan is an economy that has completed its post-Soviet transition into a major oil based economy (with the completion of the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan Pipeline), from one where the state played the major role.
Azeri GDP grew an astonishing 41.7% in the first quarter of 2007, very likely the highest of any nation worldwide.
Of course, such rates cannot be sustained, but interesting enough, despite reaching 26.4% in 2005 (second highest GDP growth in the world in 2005 only to Equatorial Guinea), and 2006 over 36.6% (world highest), GDP has been accelerating every year.
The future is still very promising for this nation.
It remains to be seen how much of this money will reach the local people, however.

It has substantial oil reserves and a significant agronomic potential based on a wide variety of climatic zones.
Since 1995, in cooperation with the IMF, Azerbaijan has pursued a highly successful economic stabilization program, which has brought inflation down from 1,800% in 1994 to 1.8% in 2000.
The national currency, the Azerbaijani manat, was stable in 2000, depreciating 3.8% against the dollar.
The budget deficit equaled a modest 1.3% of GDP in 2000.

Progress on economic reform has generally lagged behind macroeconomic stabilization.
The government has undertaken regulatory reforms in some areas, including substantial opening of trade policy, but inefficient public administration in which commercial and regulatory interests are co-mingled limit the impact of these reforms.
The government has largely completed privatization of agricultural lands and small and medium-sized enterprises.
In August 2000, the government launched a second-stage privatization program, in which many large state enterprises will be privatized.
This is a chart of trend of gross domestic product of Azerbaijan at market prices estimated by the International Monetary Fund with figures in millions of Manats.

For more than a century the backbone of the Azerbaijani economy has been petroleum, which represented 10 percent of Azerbaijan’s GDP in 2005, and is projected to double to almost 20 percent of GDP in 2007.
Now that Western oil companies are able to tap deepwater oilfields untouched by the Soviets because of poor technology, Azerbaijan is considered one of the most important spots in the world for oil exploration and development.
Proven oil reserves in the Caspian Basin, which Azerbaijan shares with Russia, Kazakhstan, and Turkmenistan, are comparable in size to the North Sea, although exploration is still in the early stages.

Azerbaijan has concluded 21 production-sharing agreements with various oil companies.
An export pipeline that transports Caspian oil to the Mediterranean from Baky through Tbilisi, Georgia to Ceyhan, Turkey (the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan Pipeline) became operational in 2006.
The pipeline is expected to generate as much as $160 billion in revenues for the country over the next 30 years.
The recent high price of oil is highly beneficial to Azerbaijan's economy as the nation is currently in the midst of an oil boom.
Eastern Caspian producers in Kazakhstan also have expressed interest in accessing this pipeline to transport a portion of their production.
In March 2001, Azerbaijan concluded a gas agreement with Turkey, providing a significant future export market for Azerbaijan.
Through the Soviet period, Azerbaijan had always been more developed industrially than Armenia and Georgia, two neighboring Transcaucasia countries--but also less diversified, as a result of slow investment in non-oil sector.
With a history of industrial development of more than 100 years, Azerbaijan proved to be a leading nation in Southern Caucasus throughout the turmoil of Soviet Union collapse in early 1990s until nowadays.

Oil remains the most prominent product of Azerbaijan's economy with cotton, natural gas and agriculture products contributing vastly to its unprecedented economic growth perceived over the last five consecutive years.
More than $60 billion was invested into Azerbaijan's oil by major international oil companies in AIOC consortium operated by BP.
Oil production under the first of these PSAs, with the Azerbaijan International Operating Company, began in November 1997 and now is about 500,000 b/d.

Azerbaijan shares all the formidable problems of the former Soviet republics in making the transition from a command to a market economy, but its considerable energy resources brighten its long-term prospects.
Azerbaijan has only recently begun making progress on economic reform, and old economic ties and structures are slowly being replaced.
An obstacle to economic progress, including stepped up foreign investment, is the continuing conflict with Armenia over the Nagorno-Karabakh region.
Trade with Russia and the other former Soviet republics is declining in importance while trade is building up with Turkey, Iran, UAE, and the nations of Europe.
Growth in 2000 should match growth in 1999.
Azerbaijan is also a member of the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO).
Long-term prospects will depend on world oil prices and the location of new pipelines in the region.
Azerbaijan faces serious environmental challenges.
Soil throughout the region was contaminated by DDT and toxic defoliants used in cotton production during the Soviet era.
Caspian petroleum and petrochemicals industries also have contributed to present air and water pollution problems.
Several environmental organizations exist in Azerbaijan, yet few funds have been allocated to begin the necessary cleanup and prevention programs.
Over-fishing by poachers is threatening the survival of Caspian sturgeon stocks, the source of most of the world's supply of caviar.
The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) has listed as threatened all sturgeon species, including all commercial Caspian varieties.
Investment (gross fixed): 54.4% of GDP (2005 est.)

The GDP growth rates observed in Azerbaijan during last years made the country one of the fastest growing economies in the world.
But the banking sector of Azerbaijan has yet to tap the vast growth potential that should be achievable due to the continuation of the high economic growth.
For this reason the banking sector remains small in relation to the size of the Azerbaijani economy.
Although in the more advanced countries banking sectors made further visible progress in the catch-up process, the Azerbaijani banking market being in an earlier stage of development, also successes in pushing forward market-oriented reform and the privatization process.
Still the banking system is considered an important element of financial system of Azerbaijan.
An advanced two-stepped banking system, which is based on market principles, (the Central Bank of the Republic of Azerbaijan in the first step, in the second one commercial banks and other non-bank credit organizations) functions in the republic.

Since 2002 important stage of restructuring of banking system started to be carried out.
Taking into consideration entry of big oil revenues in the country, as a logical result of successful oil strategy, and in this base, as the banks were ready to an effective transfer of their financial resources to the strategic goals, development strategy was made for 2002–2005.
Far-reaching reforms of the banking sector are conducted in the country.
The main challenges are due to the slow privatization rate of the state banks, a weak financial market and a lack of bank transparency.
However, the reforms have started showing positive resu lts and competition among the leading banks is increasing.

By April 1, 2010, 47 banks, 631 bank branches function in Azerbaijan.
One of banks was founded with participation of state capital, 23 of foreign capital.
To the same date, 98 non-bank credit organizations operate in the republic along with banks.
Growth of real money incomes of population, development of trust in bank system, improving the legal bases of protection of interests of creditors and depositors, in particular launch of ‘Deposits Insurance Fund’ were the criteria characterizing rapid growth of deposits of population.
As of April 1, 2010, bank deposits of population were equal to 2,4 billion AZN.
33,3% of them were long-term deposits (higher than a year).
Along with population, bank deposits of corporative customers increase dynamically.
By April 1, 2010, bank deposits of corporative customers is 2,1 bn AZN.
Dynamic development of volume of special and involved funds of the banks has created effective conditions for enlargement of active operations.
As of April 1, 2010, the volume of bank assets is 12 bn AZN.
Crediting plays special role in structure of bank assets.
As of April 1, 2010, bank credits to customers is 8.5 bn AZN, which makes 70.5% of bank assets.
Special weight of private sector in structure of credit investments is higher than 82% (7 bn AZN).