Anaximander offers up the theory of the apeiron in direct response to the earlier theory of Thales, who had claimed that the primary substance was water.
Anaximander reasons that water cannot embrace all of the opposites found in nature -- for example, water can only be wet, never dry -- and therefore, it can't be the one primary substance.
Nor could any of the other candidates, so Anaximander postulated the apeiron as a substance though it could not be perceived directly could explain the opposites which he could clearly see around him.

ANAXIMANDER, the second of the physical philosophers of Ionia, was a citizen of Miletus and a companion or pupil of Thales.
Aelian makes him the leader of the Milesian colony to Amphipolis, and hence some have inferred that he was a prominent citizen.
The computations of Apollodorus have fixed his birth in 611, and his death shortly after 547 B.C.
Tradition, probably correct in its general estimate, represents him as a successful student of astronomy and geography, and as one of the pioneers of exact science among the Greeks.
He taught, if he did not discover, the obliquity of the ecliptic, is said to have introduced into Greece the gnomon (for determining the solstices) and the sundial, and to have invented some kind of geographical map.
But his reputation is due mainly to his work on nature, few words of which remain.
From these fragments we learn that the beginning or first principle (arche, a word which, it is said, he was the first to use) was an endless, unlimited mass (apeiron), subject to neither old age nor decay, and perpetually yielding fresh materials for the series of beings which issued from it.
He never defined this principle precisely, and it has generally (e.g. by Aristotle and Augustine) been understood as a sort of primal chaos.
It embraced everything, and directed the movement of things, by which there grew up a host of shapes and differences.
Out of the vague and limitless body there sprung a central mass,--this earth of ours, cylindrical in shape, poised equidistant from surrounding orbs of fire, which had originally clung to it like the bark round a tree, until their continuity was severed, and they parted into several wheel-shaped and fire-filled bubbles of air.
Man himself and the animals had come into being by like transmutations.
Mankind was supposed by Anaximander to have sprung from some other species of animals, probably aquatic.
But as the measureless and endless had been the prime cause of the motion into separate existences and individual forms, so also, according to the just award of destiny, these forms would at an appointed season suffer the vengeance due to their earlier act of separation, and return into the vague immensity whence they had issued.
Thus the world, and all definite existences contained in it, would lose their independence and disappear in the "indeterminate."
The blazing orbs, which have drawn off from the cold earth and water, are the temporary gods of the world, clustering round the earth, which, to the ancient thinker, is the central figure.

Hippolytus (I, 5), and later Simplicius, attributed to Anaximander the earliest use of the word apeírôn ( / "infinite" or "limitless") to designate the original principle.
He would have also been the first philosopher to employ in a philosophical context the term arkhế (), which until then meant the "beginning", the "origin".
With Anaximander, it is no longer a mere point in time, but a source that can perpetually give birth to whatever will be.


Anaximander also maintained that all dying things were going back to the element whence they came (apeiron).
The one surviving fragment of Anaximander deals with that matter.
It was transmitted as a quote by Simplicius, and describes the balanced and mutual changes of the elements:

Punctuation does not exist in Ancient Greek and quotes usually blend with the surrounding text.
Consequently, it is often difficult to establish their beginning and end.
However, it is generally considered that this quote is not Simplicius' own interpretation, but Anaximander's writings, in "somewhat poetic terms."

His bold use of non-mythological explanatory hypothesis considerably distinguished him from previous cosmology writers.
It confirms an early effort in the demythification of the genealogical process.
The creation of the most ancient document written in prose, about the Universe and the origins of life, which constitutes Anaximander’s major contribution, awarded him the titles of father of cosmology or founder of astronomy.
However, pseudo-Plutarch (I, 7) specifies that he still viewed the celestial bodies as deities.

Anaximander was the first to conceive a mechanical model of the world.
The Earth floats very still in the centre of the infinite, not supported by anything.
It remains “in the same place because of its indifference”, a point of view that Aristotle considered ingenious, but false, in On the Heavens (II, 13).
Its curious shape is that of a cylinder of which the height is a third of its diameter.
The flat top forms the inhabited world with a circular oceanic mass surrounds it.

Such a model allowed the concept that celestial bodies could pass under it.
It leads further than Thales’ claim of a world floating on water.
Thales was faced with the problem of explaining what would contain its ocean, whereas Anaximander solved the problem by introducing its concept of infinite (apeiron).

At the origin, after the separation of hot and cold, appeared a ball of flame that surrounded the Earth like the bark on a tree.
The ball tore apart to form the rest of the Universe.
It resembled a system of hollow concentric wheels, filled with fire, with the rims pierced of holes like those of a flute.
Consequently, the Sun was the fire that one could see through a hole the same size as the Earth on the farthest wheel, and an eclipse corresponded with the occlusion of that hole.
The diameter of the solar wheel was twenty-seven times that of the Earth (or twenty-eight, depending on the sources) and the lunar wheel, the fire of which being less intense, eighteen (or nineteen) times.
Its hole could change shape, thus explaining the lunar phases.
The stars and the planets, located closer, followed the same model

Therefore, he was the first astronomer to consider the Sun as a huge mass and consequently, to realize how far from Earth it could be.
He was also the first to present a system where the celestial bodies turned at different distances.
Besides, according to Diogenes Laertius (II, 2), he built a celestial sphere.
This realization undoubtedly made him the first to establish the obliquity of the Zodiac as Pliny the Elder reports in Natural History (II, 8).
It is a little early to use the term Ecliptic, but Anaximander's knowledge and work on astronomy confirm that he must have observed the inclination of the celestial sphere in relation with the plane of the Earth to explain the seasons.
Aetius attributes to Pythagoras the exact measurement of the obliquity.

Strabo and Agathemerus, both Greek geographers posterior to Anaximander, claim at the very start of their work on geography that, according to Eratosthenes, Anaximander was the first to publish a map of the world.
The drawing probably inspired Hecataeus to draw a more accurate one.
Strabo viewed Anaximander and Hecataeus as the first geographers after Homer.

Of course, in these times, local maps had already appeared, notably in Egypt, in Lydia, in the Middle East and in Babylon.
They indicated roads, towns, borders and geological features.
Anaximander's innovation was that he created one representing the entire inhabited land known to Ancient Greeks.

Such an accomplishment appears quite relevant in the historical context.
Anaximander most likely drew this map for three reasons:Anaximander, surely aware of the sea's convexity, may have designed his map on a slightly rounded metal surface.
The centre or “navel” of the world ( / omphalós gẽs) could have been Delphi, or at least, so it was at a certain time.
However, in Anaximander's time, it is very likely that it was located near Miletus.
Anyhow, the Aegean Sea was near that centre, enclosed by three continents, themselves located in the middle of the ocean and isolated, such as islands, by the sea and the rivers.
Europe was bordered in the South by the Mediterranean Sea and separated from Asia by the Pontus Euxinus (the Black Sea), by the Lake Maeotis, and further East, either by the Phasis River, now called the Rioni, or the Tanais, that both could flow in the ocean.
The Nile was flowing south into the ocean, separating Libya (that then designated the African continent) from Asia.