Some aspects of cognitive music theory describe how sounds is perceived by a listener.
While the study of human interpretations of sound is called psychoacoustics, the cognitive aspects of how listeners interpret sounds as musical events is commonly known as music cognition.
In music, sound waves are usually measured not by length (or wavelength) or period, but by frequency.

Every object has a resonant frequency which is determined by the object's composition.
The different frequencies at which the sound producers of many instruments vibrate are given by the harmonic series.
The resonators of musical instruments are designed to exploit these frequencies.
Different instruments have different timbres due to variation in the size and shape of the instrument as well as the choice of materials from which the parts of the instrument are constructed.
A note is generally perceived as a sound on a single pitch.
Notes have a regular wave beat on the eardrum that humans (and perhaps animals as well) find pleasing.
This may be in part due to the fact that from the moment the hearing function becomes available to an unborn child, there is the regular rhythm of the mother's heartbeat.

Often the fundamental aspects of sound and music are described as pitch, duration, intensity, and timbre.
Musical sounds are composed of pitch, duration, and timbre.
Pitch is determined by the sound's frequency of vibration, such as A440, which vibrates at 440 Hz.
Pitches may be related by interval, their relative distance from a reference pitch.
Tuning is the process of assigning pitches to notes.
The difference in pitch between two notes is called an interval.
Notes, in turn, can be arranged into different scales and modes.
The most common scales are major, harmonic minor, melodic minor, and pentatonic.

The study of acoustics revolves around the generation, propagation and reception of mechanical waves and vibrations.
The steps shown in the above diagram can be found in any acoustical event or process.
There are many kinds of cause, both natural and volitional.
There are many kinds of transduction process that convert energy from some other form into acoustical energy, producing the acoustic wave.
There is one fundamental equation that describes acoustic wave propagation, but the phenomena that emerge from it are varied and often complex.
The wave carries energy throughout the propagating medium.
Eventually this energy is transduced again into other forms, in ways that again may be natural and/or volitionally contrived.
The final effect may be purely physical or it may reach far into the biological or volitional domains.
The five basic steps are found equally well whether we are talking about an earthquake, a submarine using sonar to locate its foe, or a band playing in a rock concert.

The central stage in the acoustical process is wave propagation.
This falls within the domain of physical acoustics.
In fluids, sound propagates primarily as a pressure wave.
In solids, mechanical waves can take many forms including longitudinal waves, transverse waves and surface waves.

Acoustics looks first at the pressure levels and frequencies in the sound wave.
Transduction processes are also of special importance.
In fluids such as air and water, sound waves propagate as disturbances in the ambient pressure level.
While this disturbance is usually small, it is still noticeable to the human ear.
The smallest sound that a person can hear, known as the threshold of hearing, is nine orders of magnitude smaller than the ambient pressure.
The loudness of these disturbances is called the sound pressure level, and is measured on a logarithmic scale in decibels.
Mathematically, sound pressure level is defined

Physicists and acoustic engineers tend to discuss sound pressure levels in terms of frequencies, partly because this is how our ears interpret sound.
What we experience as "higher pitched" or "lower pitched" sounds are pressure vibrations having a higher or lower number of cycles per second.
In a common technique of acoustic measurement, acoustic signals are sampled in time, and then presented in more meaningful forms such as octave bands or time frequency plots.
Both these popular methods are used to analyze sound and better understand the acoustic phenomenon.

The entire spectrum can be divided into three sections: audio, ultrasonic, and infrasonic.
The audio range falls between 20 Hz and 20,000 Hz.
This range is important because its frequencies can be detected by the human ear.
This range has a number of applications, including speech communication and music.
The ultrasonic range refers to the very high frequencies: 20,000 Hz and higher.
This range has shorter wavelengths which allows better resolution in imaging technologies.
Medical applications such as ultrasonography and elastography rely on the ultrasonic frequency range.
On the other end of the spectrum, the lowest frequencies are known as the infrasonic range.
These frequencies can be used to study geological phenomenon such as earthquakes.

A transducer is just a device for converting one form of energy into another.
In an acoustical context, this usually means converting sound energy into electrical energy (or vice versa).
For nearly all acoustic applications, some type of acoustic transducer is necessary.
Acoustic transducers include loudspeakers, microphones, hydrophones, sonar projectors, and ultrasound imaging equipment.
Most of these are an electromechanical devices that converts an electric signal to or from a sound pressure wave.

One common example is a subwoofer used to generate lower notes in speaker audio systems.
Subwoofers generate waves using a suspended diaphragm which oscillates, sending off pressure waves.
Electret microphones are a common type of microphone which operate using a similar principle.
As the sound wave strikes the electret's surface, the surface moves and sends off an electrical signal.

I've been very pleased to see the current growing interest in acoustic treatment.
Even as recently as five years ago, it was rare to read a magazine article or newsgroup posting about acoustics, bass traps, diffusors, room modes, and so forth.
Today such discussions are common.
And well they should be - the acoustics of a recording or listening room are arguably more important than almost anything else!

These days, all gear is acceptably flat over the most important parts of the audio range.
Distortion, aside from loudspeakers and microphones, is low enough to be inconsequential.
And noise - a big problem with analog tape recorders - is now pretty much irrelevant with modern digital recording.
Indeed, given the current high quality of even semi-pro audio gear, the real issue these days is your skill as a recording engineer and the quality of the rooms in which you record and make mixing decisions.
Top

What's the point in buying a microphone preamp that is ruler flat from DC to microwaves when the acoustics in your control room create peaks and dips as large as 20 dB throughout the entire bass range?
How important really are jitter artifacts 110 dB below the music when standing waves in your studio cause a huge hole at 80 Hz exactly where you placed a mike for the acoustic bass?
Clearly, frequency response errors of this magnitude are an enormous problem, yet most studios and control rooms suffer from this defect.
Worse, many studio owners have no idea their rooms have such a skewed response!
Without knowing what your music really sounds like, it is difficult to produce a quality product, and even more difficult to create mixes that sound the same outside your control room.

This article explains the basic principles of acoustic treatment.
Some of the material is taken from my bass traps plans published in Electronic Musician magazine, some is from my company's web site, and some is from my postings in audio newsgroups.
However the vast majority is new content that does not appear anywhere else.
I have consolidated this information here to provide a single comprehensive source that is free of commercial references.
My goal is to offer advice that is complete and accurate, yet easy to understand using common sense explanations instead of math and formulas.
Although many books about recording studio and listening room acoustics are available, most of the better ones are too technical for the average audio enthusiast to understand without effort.
And you'd need to purchase and read many books to learn a few relevant items from each.
Top

Please understand that I am not a degreed acoustician or studio architect.
However, I am very experienced in acoustic treatment, and particularly in bass traps.
The recommendations described here are the result of my own personal experience and should not be taken as the final word.
Although this article is intended mainly for audio engineers and home recordists, all of the information applies equally to home theaters, small churches and auditoriums, and other rooms where high quality reproduction of audio and music is required.

This text will surely expand as I learn more.
And as people ask me questions or request elaboration, I will incorporate the answers and additions here.
Also, there is a growing list of newer acoustics articles on the Articles page of my company's web site you can browse through.
If you have questions or comments about anything related to acoustics, please do not send me email.
Rather, I prefer that you post publicly in my EQ Magazine Acoustics forum.
This way the effort I put into answering can help others, and you can benefit from the answers of others too.
Top

There are four primary goals of acoustic treatment: 1) To prevent standing waves and acoustic interference from affecting the frequency response of recording studios and listening rooms; 2) to reduce modal ringing in small rooms and lower the reverb time in larger studios, churches, and auditoriums; 3) to absorb or diffuse sound in the room to avoid ringing and flutter echoes, and improve stereo imaging; and 4) to keep sound from leaking into or out of a room.
That is, to prevent your music from disturbing the neighbors, and to keep the sound of passing trucks from getting into your microphones.
Please understand that acoustic treatment as described here is designed to control the sound quality within a room.
It is not intended to prevent sound propagation between rooms.
Sound transmission and leakage are reduced via construction - using thick massive walls, and isolating the building structures - generally by floating the walls and floors, and hanging the ceilings with shock mounts.
Sound isolation issues are beyond the scope of this article.

Proper acoustic treatment can transform a muddy sounding room, having poor midrange definition and erratic bass response, into one that sounds clear and tight, and is a pleasure to work and listen in.
Without effective acoustic treatment, it is difficult to hear what you're doing, making you work much harder to create a good mix.
In a home theater, poor acoustics can make the sound less clear, harder to localize, and with an uneven frequency response.
Even if you spent many thousands of dollars on the most accurate loudspeakers and other equipment available, the frequency response you actually realize in an untreated room is likely to vary by 30 dB or even more.
Top

There are two basic types of acoustic treatment - absorbers and diffusors.
There are also two types of absorbers.
One type controls midrange and high frequency reflections; the other, a bass trap, is mainly for low frequencies.
All three types of treatment are usually required before a room is suitable for making mixing decisions and for serious listening.

Many studio owners and audiophiles install acoustic foam all over their walls, mistakenly believing that is sufficient.
After all, if you clap your hands in a room treated with foam (or fiberglass, blankets, or egg crates), you won't hear any reverb or echoes.
But thin treatments do nothing to control low frequency reverb or reflections, and hand claps won't reveal that.
Basement studios and living rooms having walls made of brick or concrete are especially prone to this problem - the more rigid the walls, the more reflective they are at low frequencies.
Indeed, simply building a new sheet rock wall a few inches inside an outer cement wall helps to reduce reflections at the lowest frequencies because a sheet rock wall that flexes also absorbs a little.

You may ask why you need acoustic treatment at all, since few people listening to your music will be in a room that is acoustically treated.
The reason is simple: All rooms sound differently, both in their amount of liveness and their frequency response.
If you create a mix that sounds good in your room, which has its own particular frequency response, it is likely to sound very different in other rooms.
For example, if your room has a severe lack of deep bass, your mixes will probably contain too much bass as you incorrectly compensate based on what you are hearing.
And if someone else plays your music in a room that has too much deep bass, the error will be exaggerated, and they will hear way too much deep bass.
Therefore, the only practical solution is to make your room as accurate as possible so any variation others experience is due solely to the response of their room.
Top

Diffusors are used to reduce or eliminate repetitive echoes that occur in rooms having parallel walls and a flat ceiling.
Although there are different philosophies about how much natural reverberation recording studios and listening rooms should have, all professional studio designers agree that periodic reflections caused by parallel walls are best avoided.
Therefore, diffusion is often used in addition to absorption to tame these reflections.
Such treatment is universally accepted as better than making the room completely dead by covering all of the walls with absorbent material.
For me, the ideal listening room has a mix of reflective and absorptive surfaces, with no one large area all live or all dead sounding.
Understand that "live" and "dead" as described here concern only the mid and upper frequencies.
Low frequency treatment is another matter entirely, and will be described separately.

The simplest type of diffusor is one or more sheets of plywood attached to a wall at a slight angle, to prevent sound from bouncing repeatedly between the same two walls.
Alternatively, the plywood can be bent into a curved shape, though that is more difficult to install.
In truth, this is really a deflector, not a diffuser, as described in more detail below.
However, a deflector is sufficient to avoid flutter echoes between parallel surfaces.

The photo below shows a curved deflector a friend and I built for the control room in his home recording studio.
It is placed opposite the control room window and is exactly the same size as the window (six by three feet) to maintain symmetry in the room.
If you build a deflector like this, be sure to pack fluffy fiberglass in the air space behind the wood to keep the cavity from resonating.
Ideally, the amount of curve should be greater than shown here, with the center of the panel farther from the wall.
My friend already had some 3/8-inch plywood so we used that, but it was very difficult to bend.
Had we used 1/4-inch plywood it would have bent more easily, letting us increase the amount of curving.
Top