The study of acoustics revolves around the generation, propagation and reception of mechanical waves and vibrations.
The steps shown in the above diagram can be found in any acoustical event or process.
There are many kinds of cause, both natural and volitional.
There are many kinds of transduction process that convert energy from some other form into acoustical energy, producing the acoustic wave.
There is one fundamental equation that describes acoustic wave propagation, but the phenomena that emerge from it are varied and often complex.
The wave carries energy throughout the propagating medium.
Eventually this energy is transduced again into other forms, in ways that again may be natural and/or volitionally contrived.
The final effect may be purely physical or it may reach far into the biological or volitional domains.
The five basic steps are found equally well whether we are talking about an earthquake, a submarine using sonar to locate its foe, or a band playing in a rock concert.

The central stage in the acoustical process is wave propagation.
This falls within the domain of physical acoustics.
In fluids, sound propagates primarily as a pressure wave.
In solids, mechanical waves can take many forms including longitudinal waves, transverse waves and surface waves.

Acoustics looks first at the pressure levels and frequencies in the sound wave.
Transduction processes are also of special importance.
In fluids such as air and water, sound waves propagate as disturbances in the ambient pressure level.
While this disturbance is usually small, it is still noticeable to the human ear.
The smallest sound that a person can hear, known as the threshold of hearing, is nine orders of magnitude smaller than the ambient pressure.
The loudness of these disturbances is called the sound pressure level, and is measured on a logarithmic scale in decibels.
Mathematically, sound pressure level is defined

Physicists and acoustic engineers tend to discuss sound pressure levels in terms of frequencies, partly because this is how our ears interpret sound.
What we experience as "higher pitched" or "lower pitched" sounds are pressure vibrations having a higher or lower number of cycles per second.
In a common technique of acoustic measurement, acoustic signals are sampled in time, and then presented in more meaningful forms such as octave bands or time frequency plots.
Both these popular methods are used to analyze sound and better understand the acoustic phenomenon.

The entire spectrum can be divided into three sections: audio, ultrasonic, and infrasonic.
The audio range falls between 20 Hz and 20,000 Hz.
This range is important because its frequencies can be detected by the human ear.
This range has a number of applications, including speech communication and music.
The ultrasonic range refers to the very high frequencies: 20,000 Hz and higher.
This range has shorter wavelengths which allows better resolution in imaging technologies.
Medical applications such as ultrasonography and elastography rely on the ultrasonic frequency range.
On the other end of the spectrum, the lowest frequencies are known as the infrasonic range.
These frequencies can be used to study geological phenomenon such as earthquakes.

A transducer is just a device for converting one form of energy into another.
In an acoustical context, this usually means converting sound energy into electrical energy (or vice versa).
For nearly all acoustic applications, some type of acoustic transducer is necessary.
Acoustic transducers include loudspeakers, microphones, hydrophones, sonar projectors, and ultrasound imaging equipment.
Most of these are an electromechanical devices that converts an electric signal to or from a sound pressure wave.

One common example is a subwoofer used to generate lower notes in speaker audio systems.
Subwoofers generate waves using a suspended diaphragm which oscillates, sending off pressure waves.
Electret microphones are a common type of microphone which operate using a similar principle.
As the sound wave strikes the electret's surface, the surface moves and sends off an electrical signal.