A theory by Rainer W. Kühne suggests that the Atlanteans were the Sea Peoples who attacked the Eastern Mediterranean countries around 1200 BC.
The city and state of Atlantis were located in Andalucia, 50 kilometers southwest of Seville.
Recent satellite photos show two rectangular structures which may be interpreted as the "temple of Poseidon" and "the temple of Cleito and Poseidon".
A theory that fits in with geography of 11,000 years ago sites Atlantis in the Antarctic archipelago — technically in the South Atlantic Ocean—where it would have been drowned by the rise in sea level after the last ice age.
This theory was first proposed by Rand & Rose Flem-Ath in their book, "When the Sky Fell: in Search of Atlantis."
How cold the local climate would have been is a matter for speculation.
Troy, Minoan Crete (or possibly Santorini) and other ancient port cities are asserted to be colonies.
Geology has demonstrated that no continent such as Atlantis has existed in the mid-Atlantic, so later enthusiasts have placed it in a bewildering variety of places, ranging from Sri Lanka, Peru, and Scandinavia, to the supposed center of the hollow Earth.

This opinion of the geologists refers to the impossibility of a sunken continent and not to a sunken island in the Atlantic Ocean.
That island must have been much smaller than Australia, so one cannot call it a continent.
Plato has never claimed that a whole continent has disappeared, he only referred to an island, in front of another continent.
The modern day legendary Riven, The Seer, proposes Atlantis to be a mid-sized Continental island in the Atlantic Ocean based out of the Amperes/Gettysburg Seamounts that was destroyed in several stages from Asteroid and Meteoric showers combined with a major Transform Fracture adjacent to the Atlantic Ridge.
In 1979 a Russian expedition team found traces of a civilization at the Amperes Seamount which was published in the New York Times.
The final catastrophe occurring at 6482 BC for the time also of the Great Flood that pushed civilizations into the eastern mediterranean.
Later Atlantis controlling its foundations up to Tyrhennia and Egypt from their Lake Tritonis Region no later than 1500 BC.
Riven also translated the 10 Kings of Atlantis and the meaning of the name Atlantis into Fatherland and discovered the word Araklum in Etruscan scripts that relates to the mysterious Orichalcum element found in Atlantis.
He argues that this battle must have been prior to 3100 BC and that the Narmer Palette and Gebel-Arak knife(4000 BC.
), found in Egypt prior to King Menes(3100 BC), is evidence of an earlier foreign Sea-People invasion.
His destruction theory is also based on the Eye of Ra Myth, the eruptions of Mt.Hekla and Mt.Vesuvius, the ecliptic alignment of planets on Nov 1,6482 BC, All Saints Day, and the flooding of the Black Sea from the Bosphorous straits opening.
He has quite the visual website detailing Atlantis, its location and maps with a list of the Ten kings of Atlantis and links to research sites about Atlantis called Tribes of Atlantis by Riven.
The Atlantis story is a retelling by Plato and not a myth as many scholars attest because of Plato and his idealistic philosophies.
The Original authors were Solon and Dropides who told the story to Critias elder who told it to Critias junior.
Critias detailed the story to Socrates where it was later adapted by Plato.
In 570 BC, in the time of Pharaoh Amasis, the extremely elderly Egyptian Priest, realizing the end of Egypt was near, let the secret of Atlantis finally fall from his well guarded lips.
The German Otto Muck tries to confirm his view that Atlantis was in the Atlantic Ocean.
Through the impact of a meteor the crust of the Earth ruptured along the Mid-Atlantic Ridge and Atlantis sunk up to its mountain-peaks, which are now the Azores.
A further effect of the impact was a floodwave that many cultures call the Deluge (mythology).
Not all geologists deny the possibility of a sunken island in Central America.
After the Charles Berlitz book The Mystery of Atlantis, a Canadian Hungarian geologist-topographer's book was published, entitled.
The author, Z.A.
Simon, called the attention to these controversies.
He included some supporting conclusions of Dr. J. Manson Valentine, M. Dmitri Ribikoff, E. Umland and C. Umland, Robert B. Stacy-Judd, Dr. David Zink, John P. Cohane, Peter Tompkins, Pino Turolla, Captain Alexander, Francis Hitching, James Bailey, Dr. C.J.
Cazeau, Dr. S.D.
Scott, Brad Steiger and William R. Fix.

The June 1981 edition of Marine Geology shows some radiocarbon dates on mangrove peat, based on the estimate of Broecker and Kulp, listing dates between 5590 and 3680 BC, with connection of the gradual sinking of the Florida–Bimini region.
Most recently the rate of the sea level's rise has slowed to 4.5 in (114 mm) per century.
Prior to that time it was one foot per century.
Near Andros Island, underwater explorer Jacques Cousteau found a huge submerged cave 165 ft (50 m) beneath the surface.
There are stalactites and stalagmites in it, that can be formed in the open air only.
Marine sediments on the walls of the grotto enabled scientists to estimate its submersion around or after 10,000 BC.
The submarine topography of the Bahamian region shown in the huge Russian Atlas Mira by detailed isobaths, catches the attention of a topographer.
The sea floor on the northern side of Cuba, Haiti and Puerto Rico indicates a definite system of submerged valleys of ancient rivers, combined with sunken mountain ranges.
The "Tongue of the Ocean" at Andros Island is undoubtedly an underwater ravine caused by terrible tectonic forces, surrounded by almost vertical walls, as a "memento" of the catastrophe.
The main problem with this theory is that Atlantis was supposed to have submerged rapidly, following an earthquake.

Z.A.
Simon offers an "accurate" map of Plato's rectangular island with its given dimensions as 2,000 by 3,000 stadia, overlaying its outline on the suspected ancient irregular shoreline of that traditional island in the Bahamas region.
(An Attic stadium corresponds to 177.6 m) Recently, a theory proposed by J.M.
Allen has focused attention on the Altiplano in Bolivia.
Allen took Plato's physical description of the location of Atlantis and compared it to physical features found in the Altiplano, and he found that they matched Plato's description on almost all counts, but for a factor of 2.
Allen reasons that this error makes sense because pre-Columbian South Americans counted in base 20.
Another piece of evidence that Allen cites is Plato's mention of a gold/copper alloy called orichalcum that is only found in the Andes.
Allen also claims that the very name of the place, Atlantis, comes from two Native American words, atl meaning "water", and antis meaning "copper".
Supporters of the South American Atlantis also cite scientists finding evidence of cocaine derived chemicals in Egyptian mummies.
Cocaine, coming only from the coca plant found exclusively in South America, is explained as evidence that there was pre-Columbian cross-Atlantic contact that could have led to the tale of a disaster reaching the ears of Plato via Egypt.

This theory has been largely discredited.
The presence of cocaine in mummies (among other substances), as claimed by a group of German scientists, are almost completely unaccepted in mainstream archaeology.
The altiplano lies 4,000 meters above sea level in a relatively geologically stable area.
The supposed canal in Atlantis proved to be not only unnavigable in many places when a group attempted to travel it, but is widely recognized by geologists to be a normal river.
The lack of ancient civilization in most of the area was dismissed by Allen with the claim that an Andean temple is a "sacred landscape".
German researchers Siegfried and Christian Schoppe locate Atlantis in the Black Sea: Before 5500 BC there was a great plain in the northwest at a former freshwater-lake.
5510 BC the barrier at today's Bosporus broke due to the rising sea level of the world-ocean.
The Pillars of Hercules are identical with the Strait of Bosporus.
Oreichalcos means the obsidian stone that used to be a cash-equivalent at that time and was replaced by the spondylus shell around 5500 BC.
The geocatastrophic event led to the neolithic diaspora in Europe, also beginning 5500 BC.

In 2000AD Bobert Ballard in a small submarine found remains of human habitation around 300 feet underwater in the Black Sea off the north coast of Turkey.
The area flooded around 5000BC.
This flood may have inspired the Biblical story of Noah's Ark; but the area need not be Atlantis.
Among those who believe in an historical Atlantis, one common theory holds that Plato's story of the destruction of Atlantis was inspired by massive volcanic eruptions on the Mediterranean island of Santorini during Minoan times.
A main criticism of this theory is that the ancient Greeks were well aware of volcanoes, and if there was a volcanic eruption, it would seem likely that it would be mentioned.
Solon got his information from Egypt; if we assume that an Ancient Egyptian symbol for "hundred" was mistakenly read as "thousand", that reduces the age and size of Atlantis by a factor of a tenth, and with that alteration Atlantis fits Minoan Crete well.
Many people consider this to be the likeliest theory.
Robert Sarmast, an American architect, claims to have definitely found the lost city of Atlantis on November 14, 2004, saying that by using sonar scans he was able to find manmade walls that matched the description of the structures described by Plato, CNN reports.
The site lies 1,500m deep between Cyprus and Syria.
The most recent speculation is published in the book "Atlantis From a Geographer's Perspective: Mapping the Fairy Land" (ISBN 0975594605) by Swedish geographer Dr. Ulf Erlingsson from University of Uppsala.
It proposes that Atlantis actually referred to Ireland which fits closely in geographic and landmark descriptions.
Ireland has not sunk beneath the sea, but the Dogger Bank shoal was an island which sank in the North Sea about 6100 B.C. as the world sea level rose as the Ice Age icecaps melted.

In 2002 the italian journalist Sergio Frau in his book Le colonne d'Ercole hypothesized that the Pillars of Hercules could be identified not with Gibraltar but with the Sicily Strait between Africa and Sicily, so Atlantis was really Sardinia.
A catastrophic event (with a big wave) eradicated from Sardinia the ancient and still enigmatic Nuragic civilization.
The few survivors migrated to the near Italian peninsula, founding the Etruscan civilization, the base for the later Roman civilization.
Another recent theory is based on a recreation of the geography of the Mediterranean at the time of Atlantis' supposed existence.
Plato states that Atlantis was located beyond the Pillars of Hercules, the name given to the Strait of Gibraltar linking the Mediterranean to the Atlantic Ocean.
11,000 years ago the sea level in the area was some 130 metres lower, exposing a number of islands in the strait.
One of these, Spartel, could have been Atlantis, though there are a number of inconsistencies with Plato's account.
The work Toward the Light claims to describe Atlantis, including its exact geographical location.
British archaeologist Peter James took a clue from Plato's mention of king Tantalus, and investigated the city of Tantalis (also Tantalos) in the province of Manisa, Turkey.
In addition to having very similar sounding anagram names, numerous inscriptions and ancient writings from the region matched the Atlantis story.
Tantalis, formerly a wealthy city state, was destroyed when a powerful earthquake struck and caused a lake to flood the city.
The geologist Eberhard Zangger has proposed the theory that Atlantis was in fact the city state of Troy (See: The Flood from Heaven: Deciphering the Atlantis legend; Sidgwick & Jackson, 1992, ISBN 0688113508).
He both agrees and disagrees with Rainer W. Kühne: He believes too that the Trojans-Atlanteans were the sea peoples, but only a minor part of them.
He proposes that all Greek speaking city states of the Aegean civilization or Mycenae constituted the sea peoples and that they destroyed each other's economies in a series of semi-fratricidal wars lasting several decades.
Jules Verne's classic 20,000 Leagues Under The Sea also included a visit to sunken Atlantis aboard Captain Nemo's submarine Nautilus.
One film set in times before Classical Greece arose shows shipwrecked Greek sailors in the Atlantic being rescued by a modern-looking submarine which was based on Atlantis.

Plato's accounts of Atlantis are found in his works entitled "Timaeus" and "Critias" and are the earliest known references to the mythological civilization of the Atlanteans.
In his story, Critias (360 BCE) describes the origins and form of Atlantis to Socrates and his guests.
The dialog of Timaeus is a continuation of Critias' tale, and delivers a more thorough history of ancient civilizations and mentions the state of Atlantis and its foreign relations, albeit briefly.

According to Critias, the (Hellenic) Gods of old divided up the land so that each might own a lot for themselves and Poseidon was appropriately and to his liking bequeathed the island of Atlantis.
The isle was larger than Libya and Asia Minor combined, and after being sunk by an earthquake became an impassable mud shoal, inhibiting travel between the Atlantic Ocean and the Mediterranean Sea.
The Egyptians described Atlantis as an island approximately 700 kilometers in diameter, comprising mostly mountains in the northern portions and all along the shore, and encompassing a great plain of an oblong shape in the south "extending in one direction three thousand stadia 600 km, but across the centre inland it was two thousand stadia 400 km".

Fifty stadia inland from the center of the southern coast was a "mountain not very high on any side".
Here lived a native woman with whom Poseidon fell in love and bore five pairs of male twins.
The eldest of these, Atlas (mythology), was made rightful king of the entire island and the ocean (now the Atlantic Ocean), and was given the mountain of his birth and the surrounding area as his fiefdom.
Atlas' twin Gadeirus or Eumelus in Greek, was given the easternmost portion of the island which also lay at its northern extreme facing Gades, a town in southern Spain.
The other four pairs of twins: Ampheres and Evaemon, Mneseus and Autochthon, Elasippus and Mestor, and Azaes [[Azores]?]
and Diaprepes "were the inhabitants and rulers of divers islands in the open sea".

Poseidon carved the inland mountain where his love dwelt into a palace and enclosed it with three circular moats of increasing width varying from one to three stadia and separated by rings of land proportional in size.
The Atlanteans then built bridges northward from the mountain, making a road to the rest of the island.
They dug a great canal to the sea, and alongside the bridges carved tunnels into the rings of rock so that ships could pass into the city around the mountain, and docks were carved into the rock walls of the moats.
Every passage to the city was guarded by gates and towers, and three walls surrounded the city and its rings.
The walls were constructed of red, white and black rock which was quarried from the moats, and were covered with brass, tin and orichalcum, respectively.

According to Critias nine thousand years before his tale, a war took place between those outside the Pillars of Heracles and those who dwelt within them.
The Atlanteans had conquered the Mediterranean as far east as Egypt and the continent into Tyrrhenia, and subjected its people to slavery.
The Athenians led an alliance of resistors against the Atlantean empire and as the alliance became broken, prevailed alone against the empire, liberating the occupied lands.
“But afterwards there occurred violent earthquakes and floods; and in a single day and night of misfortune all your warlike men in a body sank into the earth, and the island of Atlantis in like manner disappeared in the depths of the sea."

Aristotle thought that the Atlantic Ocean was shallow and muddy (Meteor.
354a22).
Yet, the pseudo-Aristotelic work On Marvellous Things Heard presents a rumor saying that the Carthaginians had discovered and colonised a large and fertile island lying several days' sail outside of the Pillars of Hercules.
The frequent identification with the legendary island of Antillia is, however, merely a conjecture.

In his commentary on Plato's Timaeus, Proclus writes: "That an island of such nature and size once existed is evident from what is said by certain authors who investigated the things around the outer sea.
For according to them, there were seven islands in that sea in their time, sacred to Persephone, and also three others of enormous size, one of which was sacred to Pluto, another to Ammon, and another one between them to Poseidon, the extent of which was a thousand stadia; and the inhabitants of it – they add – pre-served the remembrance from their ancestors of the immeasurably large island of Atlantis which had really existed there and which for many ages had reigned over all islands in the Atlantic sea and which itself had like-wise been sacred to Poseidon.
Now these things Marcellus has written in his Aethiopica" (transl.
Taylor, Nesselrath).
However, Heinz-Günther Nesselrath argues that this Marcellus - who is otherwise unknown - is probably not a historian but a novellist (Greece & Rome 52 (2005) 153-171).

The geographer Strabo locates the two mythical islands of the Odyssey, Ogygia (inhabited by the Circe) and Scheria (inhabited by the Phaeacians) in the Atlantic Ocean (Geogr.
1.2.18).
Similarly, Plutarch says that Ogygia lies about five days' sail to the west of what is called nowadays the British Isles.
He ads that westwards from that island, there were the three islands of Cronus, to where proud and warlike men used to come from the continent beyond the islands, in order to offer sacrifice to the gods of the ocean.
Most modern scholars locate the Homeric islands somewhere in the Mediterranean (if anywhere): Scheria may be an older name of Corfu.
It is, however, possible that the mythical names - which were too exotic to be associated with the familiar Ionian Sea - were attributed to new discoveries in the western ocean in a later period.

Actual Evidence for the Existence of Atlantis: "This is probably the greatest discovery in World history", was stated by Maxine Asher, the co-director of a scientific expedition that found Atlantis at the bottom of the ocean, reported United Press International and major newspapers in the United States during the summer of 1973.
UPI continued that "Maxine Asher said that scuba divers found data to prove the existence of the super-civilization which legend says sank beneath the sea thousands of years ago".
"The divers had found evidence of roads and large columns, some with concentric spiral motifs, in the exact place described by the Greek philosopher Plato".

A pyramid explored by Dr Ray Brown on the sea floor off the Bahamas in 1970.
Brown was accompanied by 4 divers who also found roads, domes, rectangular buildings, unidentified metallic instruments, and a statue holding a "mysterious" crystal containing miniature pyramids.
The metal devices and crystals were taken to Florida for analysis at a university there.
What was discovered was that the crystal amplified energy that passed through it.
Ruins of roads and buildings found off Binini Island in the 1960's by the photographed and published expeditions of Dr Mansan Valentine.
Similar ruins were also photographed off Cay Sal in the Bahamas.
Similar underwater ruins were found off Morocco and photographed 50 to 60 feet underwater.
A huge 11 room pyramid found 10,000 feet under water in the mid Atlantic Ocean with a huge crystal top, as reported by Tony Benlk.
A 1977 report of a huge pyramid found off Cay Sal in the Bahamas, photographed by Ari Marshall's expedition, about 150 feet underwater.
The pyramid was about 650 feet high.
Mysteriously the surrounding water was lit by sparkling white water flowing out of the openings in the pyramid and surrounded by green water, instead of the black water everywhere else at that depth.
A sunken city about 400 miles off Portugal found by Soviet expeditions led by Boris Asturua, with buildings made of extremely strong concrete and plastics.
He said "the remains of streets suggests the use of monorails for transportation".
He also brought up a statue.
A marble acropolis underwater across five acres of fluted columns raised on pillars.
Heinrich Schilemann, the man who found and excavated the famous ruins of Troy (which historians thought was only a legend), reportedly left a written account of his discovery of a bronze vase with a metal unknown to scientists who examined it, in the famous Priam Treasure.
Inside it are glyphs in Phoenician stating that it was from King Chronos of Atlantis.
Identical pottery was found in Tiajuanaco, Bolivia.
Many other examples of roads, buildings and columns are available, many of them made with materials not available in their areas.

The Timaeus begins with an introduction, followed by an account of the creations and structure of the universe and ancient civilizations.
In the introduction, Socrates muses on the perfect society (as described in Plato's Republic) and wonders if he and his guests could come up with a story which puts this society into action.
Critias mentions an allegedly historical tale that he would make the perfect example, and follows up by describing Atlantis in the Critias.
In his account, ancient Athens represents the "perfect society," and Atlantis, its opponent, represents the opposite of the "perfect" traits described in the Republic.
Critias claims that his account of ancient Athens and Atlantis stems from a visit to Egypt by the Athenian lawgiver Solon in the 6th century BC.
In Egypt, Solon met Sonchis, a priest of Thebes, who translated the history of ancient Athens and Atlantis, recorded on pillars in Egyptian hieroglyphs, into Greek.

According to Critias, the Hellenic gods of old divided the land so that each god might own a lot; Poseidon was appropriately, and to his liking, bequeathed the island of Atlantis.
The island was larger than Libya and Asia Minor combined, but has since been sunk by an earthquake and became an impassable mud shoal, inhibiting travel between the Atlantic Ocean and the Mediterranean Sea.
The Egyptians described Atlantis as an island approximately 700 km across, comprising mostly mountains in the northern portions and along the shore, and encompassing a great plain of an oblong shape in the south "extending in one direction three thousand stadia 600 km, but across the center inland it was two thousand stadia 400 km."

Fifty stadia inland from the middle of the southern coast was a "mountain not very high on any side."
Here lived a native woman with whom Poseidon fell in love and who bore him five pairs of male twins.
The eldest of these, Atlas, was made rightful king of the entire island and the ocean (now the Atlantic Ocean), and was given the mountain of his birth and the surrounding area as his fiefdom.
Atlas's twin Gadeirus or Eumelus in Greek, was given the easternmost portion of the island which also lay at its northern extreme facing Gades, a town in southern Spain.
The other four pairs of twins — Ampheres and Evaemon, Mneseus and Autochthon, Elasippus and Mestor, and Azaes (possibly the Azores) and Diaprepes — "were the inhabitants and rulers of divers islands in the open sea."

Poseidon carved the inland mountain where his love dwelt into a palace and enclosed it with three circular moats of increasing width, varying from one to three stadia and separated by rings of land proportional in size.
The Atlanteans then built bridges northward from the mountain, making a route to the rest of the island.
They dug a great canal to the sea, and alongside the bridges carved tunnels into the rings of rock so that ships could pass into the city around the mountain; they carved docks from the rock walls of the moats.
Every passage to the city was guarded by gates and towers, and a wall surrounded each of the city's rings.
The walls were constructed of red, white and black rock quarried from the moats, and were covered with brass, tin and orichalcum, respectively.

According to Critias, 9,000 years before his lifetime, a war took place between those outside the Pillars of Hercules and those who dwelt within them.
The Atlanteans had conquered the Mediterranean as far east as Egypt and the continent into Tyrrhenia, and subjected its people to slavery.
The Athenians led an alliance of resistors against the Atlantean empire and as the alliance disintegrated, prevailed alone against the empire, liberating the occupied lands.
“But afterwards there occurred violent earthquakes and floods; and in a single day and night of misfortune all your warlike men in a body sank into the earth, and the island of Atlantis in like manner disappeared in the depths of the sea."
Plato claimed it was somewhere outside the Pillars of Hercules, now known as the Strait of Gibraltar.
Modern scholars generally regard Plato's description of Atlantis as an invention, though its kernel may have been formed from hazy memories of historical events such as the Thera eruption.
However, in antiquity, there were a few philosophers, geographers, and historians who believed that Atlantis was real.
For instance, the philosopher Crantor, a student of Plato's student Xenocrates, tried to find proof of Atlantis' existence.
For his opinions we are dependent on Proclus' commentary on the Timaeus, written in the 5th century AD.
Proclus reports that Crantor said he had travelled to Egypt and seen the same columns on which Plato had seen the history of Atlantis, written in hieroglyphic characters.

Plato's account of Atlantis may have also inspired parodic imitation: writing only a few decades after the Timaeus and Critias, the historian Theopompus of Chios wrote of a land beyond the ocean known as "Meropis."
This description was included in Book 8 of his voluminous Philippica, which contains a dialogue between King Midas and Silenus, a companion of Dionysus.
Silenus describes the Meropids, a race of men who grow to twice normal size, and inhabit two cities on the island of Meropis: Eusebes ("Pious-town") and "Machimos" ("Fighting-town").
Hans-Gūnther Nesselrath has argued that these and other details of Silenus' story are meant as imitation and exaggeration of the Atlantis story, for the purpose of exposing Plato's ideas to ridicule.

Another passage from Proclus' 5th century AD commentary on the Timaeus gives a description of the geography of Atlantis: "That an island of such nature and size once existed is evident from what is said by certain authors who investigated the things around the outer sea.
For according to them, there were seven islands in that sea in their time, sacred to Persephone, and also three others of enormous size, one of which was sacred to Pluto, another to Ammon, and another one between them to Poseidon, the extent of which was a thousand stadia; and the inhabitants of it—they add—preserved the remembrance from their ancestors of the immeasurably large island of Atlantis which had really existed there and which for many ages had reigned over all islands in the Atlantic sea and which itself had like-wise been sacred to Poseidon.
Now these things Marcellus has written in his Aethiopica".
However, Heinz-Günther Nesselrath argues that this Marcellus—who is otherwise unknown—is probably not a historian but a novelist.

Dispendos is believed to a kingdom in ancient times that lied on the Indian Ocean.
They say the kingdom was farming civilisations that was existed from 12,000 years to 6,000 years ago but other than that not much is known about them.
It could be that followed the religion of Hinduism but there is no evidence for this at any stage of time.
No one knows if they had a just a monarchy or counsel as well that ran their land.
It is said that dis-appeared after a volcanic eruption.
It could have been that they were also a warrior race.
There main resource could have been fruits and vegetable because it is believed that they were vegetarian.
They could have had their own language but might not be able write or read.
Given that they live on an island it would be the population would not have been more than 10,000 people in total.
They might not of never suffered famine because it is said to have delta systems.
It could have been that might of built boat but this is just a rumour.
They could of have had games they played.
They are some times referred to the Atlantis of the east due the way that it destroyed.
If there were some written document of what it look like then we would know more about it.
There are some that say that it king was also the king of evil but this might not be true.
There could have some dispendosen that could survived but no one knows for sure, maybe they were all wiped out of existent with no current day descendants, but they could be the foundation of Indian and Persian empire because of there warrior race and knowledge of agriculture that would have been handy for the foundation of any civilisation.
E.g.; Babylon, Greeks, and many more.
There could have been many tale of there culture that we have no knowledge of.
But as a Hindu culture it would be the same as the Indian stories that we would know of.Their weapons could have been swords but swords take some level skill, so they would of have had the tools to make them or their swords could have been primitive to what we of.
They could of have bow and arrow but again this is to advance for this time.They could have had spears as well but this is the most logical due to the fact that we had them during the ice age.
But being a warrior race would have some or some thing at that time, so it could have be they fought mythical creatures like dragons to show leadership.
But they could also have fought demons like Indians of that time.
Hot climate must have made their skins of dark coloured.
Not much is know about the animal that must have had.
But it is likely they had fishes like the one in Persian sea in their rivers and birds like parrots living there trees, there could have been monkeys they might of had snakes as pest to the land and many insects.
There is a likely hood that they had cows.
There clothing could have been like the Egyptians but may have made of silk or wool.
there currency might have been small wooden coins.
There is a love story of the king and his wife meeting at conranation.

The Canary Islands have also been identified as a possible location, West of the Straits of Gibraltar but in close proximity to the Mediterranean Sea.
Various islands or island groups in the Atlantic were also identified as possible locations, notably the Azores (Mid-Atlantic islands which are a territory of Portugal), and even several Caribbean islands.
Even the coastal Spanish city of Cadiz near Gibraltar was formerly know as Gades, which is a modern contraction of the Gadeirus named in Plato's Critias.
Popular culture unceasingly places Atlantis in the Atlantic Ocean and perpetuates the original Platonic ideal.

The natural history of the mouth of the Mediterranean Sea carries a great deal of potential for the kind of geological violence that destroyed Atlantis.
Nearby island groups such as the Canary Islands and Madeira lend credence to the idea that there may once have been a great collapsed caldera in the region, from which might have arisen a Submarine volcano much like Mauna Lea in Hawaii.
Such a landform could easily have been destroyed in a cataclysmic manner if seawater had come into contact with the magma extrusion beneath the volcano's shield.
The instantaneous superheating and vaporization of large quantities of seawater that results from such mixing creates an immense buildup of pressure which may cause an Phreatic explosion in an effort to release itself, and could easily have destroyed the island of Atlantis in a terrible volcanic eruption, just as it did the island of Krakatoa.

Moreover, the surprising proximity of a transverse faultline separating the Eurasian Continental tectonic plate from the African Continental tectonic plate makes possible the catastrophic earthquake that supposedly followed the explosion of Atlantis.
As a phreatic explosion releases pressure, previously supported geological structures are allowed to collapse.
In this case, such collapses may have relieved pressure along the fault line, and caused the two tectonic plates to slip.
If the resulting slip were significant enough, the associated earthquake could have been sufficient to cause the remaining portions of th Atlantean landform to collapse into the sea.

There is some evidence to the former two in that according to Plato's account, Atlantis was destroyed in a great earthquake accompanied by flooding.
Additionally, Mesoamerican folklore contains numerous accounts of refugees fleeing a volcanic eruption in the Atlantic including an eyewitness account of the explosion.
The area just outside the Straits of Gibraltar is bordered to the north by the junction of the European and African tectonic plates, and to the west by the mid-Atlantic ridge, another plate junction.
This area is still plagued by seismic activity.
Such geological facts may account for the earthquake, but what about the flooding and explosion?
Numerous island formations on the globe have been attributed to the remnants of giant volcanoes from long ago in the Earth's past.
Many of the islands in the Pacific Rim are assumed to be the remnants of a giant volcanic caldera created by the mountain's collapse after much of it's magma has been ejected.
Such calderas may still encase magma channels which may form into subsidiary volcanoes, and following another explosion, the new volcano could form another caldera.
However, the original caldera might still collapse, and such could have been the cause of the floods.
Of course, such volcanic activity could easily disrupt geological stability in a region, triggering fault slips and earthquakes.
In such a manner, the traditional Atlantis could actually been destroyed.
Additionally there is the possibility that the eruption was caused by a phreatic explosion, similar to the destruction of Krakatoa and perhaps of anthropogenic origins.
Such an explosion would have scattered shards of the island all across the Northern Atlantic region and might even have caused a small ice age.