Rett syndrome is relatively rare, affecting almost exclusively females, one out of 10,000 to 15,000.
After a period of normal development, sometime between 6 and 18 months, autism-like symptoms begin to appear.
The little girl's mental and social development regresses—she no longer responds to her parents and pulls away from any social contact.
If she has been talking, she stops; she cannot control her feet; she wrings her hands.
Some of the problems associated with Rett syndrome can be treated.
Physical, occupational, and speech therapy can help with problems of coordination, movement, and speech.

Scientists sponsored by the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development have discovered that a mutation in the sequence of a single gene can cause Rett syndrome.
This discovery may help doctors slow or stop the progress of the syndrome.
It may also lead to methods of screening for Rett syndrome, thus enabling doctors to start treating these children much sooner, and improving the quality of life these children experience.
* Very few children who have an autism spectrum disorder (ASD) diagnosis meet the criteria for childhood disintegrative disorder (CDD).
An estimate based on four surveys of ASD found fewer than two children per 100,000 with ASD could be classified as having CDD.
This suggests that CDD is a very rare form of ASD.
It has a strong male preponderance.
** Symptoms may appear by age 2, but the average age of onset is between 3 and 4 years.
Until this time, the child has age-appropriate skills in communication and social relationships.
The long period of normal development before regression helps differentiate CDD from Rett syndrome.

In contrast, most children with ASD seem to have tremendous difficulty learning to engage in the give-and-take of everyday human interaction.
Even in the first few months of life, many do not interact and they avoid eye contact.
They seem indifferent to other people, and often seem to prefer being alone.
They may resist attention or passively accept hugs and cuddling.
Later, they seldom seek comfort or respond to parents' displays of anger or affection in a typical way.
Research has suggested that although children with ASD are attached to their parents, their expression of this attachment is unusual and difficult to "read."
To parents, it may seem as if their child is not attached at all Parents who looked forward to the joys of cuddling, teaching, and playing with their child may feel crushed by this lack of the expected and typical attachment behavior.

Children with ASD also are slower in learning to interpret what others are thinking and feeling.
Subtle social cues—whether a smile, a wink, or a grimace—may have little meaning.
To a child who misses these cues, "Come here" always means the same thing, whether the speaker is smiling and extending her arms for a hug or frowning and planting her fists on her hips.
Without the ability to interpret gestures and facial expressions, the social world may seem bewildering.
To compound the problem, people with ASD have difficulty seeing things from another person's perspective.
Most 5-year-olds understand that other people have different information, feelings, and goals than they have.
A person with ASD may lack such understanding.
This inability leaves them unable to predict or understand other people's actions.

Although not universal, it is common for people with ASD also to have difficulty regulating their emotions.
This can take the form of "immature" behavior such as crying in class or verbal outbursts that seem inappropriate to those around them.
The individual with ASD might also be disruptive and physically aggressive at times, making social relationships still more difficult.
They have a tendency to "lose control," particularly when they're in a strange or overwhelming environment, or when angry and frustrated.
They may at times break things, attack others, or hurt themselves.
In their frustration, some bang their heads, pull their hair, or bite their arms.
By age 3, most children have passed predictable milestones on the path to learning language; one of the earliest is babbling.
By the first birthday, a typical toddler says words, turns when he hears his name, points when he wants a toy, and when offered something distasteful, makes it clear that the answer is "no."

Some children diagnosed with ASD remain mute throughout their lives.
Some infants who later show signs of ASD coo and babble during the first few months of life, but they soon stop.
Others may be delayed, developing language as late as age 5 to 9.
Some children may learn to use communication systems such as pictures or sign language.

Those who do speak often use language in unusual ways.
They seem unable to combine words into meaningful sentences.
Some speak only single words, while others repeat the same phrase over and over.
Some ASD children parrot what they hear, a condition called echolalia.
Although many children with no ASD go through a stage where they repeat what they hear, it normally passes by the time they are 3.

Some children only mildly affected may exhibit slight delays in language, or even seem to have precocious language and unusually large vocabularies, but have great difficulty in sustaining a conversation.
The "give and take" of normal conversation is hard for them, although they often carry on a monologue on a favorite subject, giving no one else an opportunity to comment.
Another difficulty is often the inability to understand body language, tone of voice, or "phrases of speech."
They might interpret a sarcastic expression such as "Oh, that's just great" as meaning it really IS great.

While it can be hard to understand what ASD children are saying, their body language is also difficult to understand.
Facial expressions, movements, and gestures rarely match what they are saying.
Also, their tone of voice fails to reflect their feelings.
A high-pitched, sing-song, or flat, robot-like voice is common.
Some children with relatively good language skills speak like little adults, failing to pick up on the "kid-speak" that is common in their peers.

Without meaningful gestures or the language to ask for things, people with ASD are at a loss to let others know what they need.
As a result, they may simply scream or grab what they want.
Until they are taught better ways to express their needs, ASD children do whatever they can to get through to others.
As people with ASD grow up, they can become increasingly aware of their difficulties in understanding others and in being understood.
As a result they may become anxious or depressed.
Although children with ASD usually appear physically normal and have good muscle control, odd repetitive motions may set them off from other children.
These behaviors might be extreme and highly apparent or more subtle.
Some children and older individuals spend a lot of time repeatedly flapping their arms or walking on their toes.
Some suddenly freeze in position.

As children, they might spend hours lining up their cars and trains in a certain way, rather than using them for pretend play.
If someone accidentally moves one of the toys, the child may be tremendously upset.
ASD children need, and demand, absolute consistency in their environment.
A slight change in any routine—in mealtimes, dressing, taking a bath, going to school at a certain time and by the same route—can be extremely disturbing.
Perhaps order and sameness lend some stability in a world of confusion.

Repetitive behavior sometimes takes the form of a persistent, intense preoccupation.
For example, the child might be obsessed with learning all about vacuum cleaners, train schedules, or lighthouses.
Often there is great interest in numbers, symbols, or science topics.

When children's perceptions are accurate, they can learn from what they see, feel, or hear.
On the other hand, if sensory information is faulty, the child's experiences of the world can be confusing.
Many ASD children are highly attuned or even painfully sensitive to certain sounds, textures, tastes, and smells.
Some children find the feel of clothes touching their skin almost unbearable.
Some sounds—a vacuum cleaner, a ringing telephone, a sudden storm, even the sound of waves lapping the shoreline—will cause these children to cover their ears and scream.

In ASD, the brain seems unable to balance the senses appropriately.
Some ASD children are oblivious to extreme cold or pain.
An ASD child may fall and break an arm, yet never cry.
Another may bash his head against a wall and not wince, but a light touch may make the child scream with alarm.
Many children with ASD have some degree of mental impairment.
When tested, some areas of ability may be normal, while others may be especially weak.
For example, a child with ASD may do well on the parts of the test that measure visual skills but earn low scores on the language subtests.
One in four children with ASD develops seizures, often starting either in early childhood or adolescence.4 Seizures, caused by abnormal electrical activity in the brain, can produce a temporary loss of consciousness (a "blackout"), a body convulsion, unusual movements, or staring spells.
Sometimes a contributing factor is a lack of sleep or a high fever.
An EEG (electroencephalogram—recording of the electric currents developed in the brain by means of electrodes applied to the scalp) can help confirm the seizure's presence.

In most cases, seizures can be controlled by a number of medicines called "anticonvulsants."
The dosage of the medication is adjusted carefully so that the least possible amount of medication will be used to be effective.
This disorder is the most common inherited form of mental retardation.
It was so named because one part of the X chromosome has a defective piece that appears pinched and fragile when under a microscope.
Fragile X syndrome affects about two to five percent of people with ASD.
It is important to have a child with ASD checked for Fragile X, especially if the parents are considering having another child.
For an unknown reason, if a child with ASD also has Fragile X, there is a one-in-two chance that boys born to the same parents will have the syndrome.5 Other members of the family who may be contemplating having a child may also wish to be checked for the syndrome.
Tuberous sclerosis is a rare genetic disorder that causes benign tumors to grow in the brain as well as in other vital organs.
It has a consistently strong association with ASD.

Due to the complexity of autism, there are many of facets of sociology that needs to be considered when discussing it, such as the culture possible with it.
In addition, there are several communities being formed within the autistic community, and in recent times they have become a bit polarized.
Main article: autistic community

Much like many other controversies in the world, the autistic community itself has splintered off into several groups.
Essentially, these groups are those who seek a cure for autism, dubbed pro-cure, those who do not desire a cure for autism and as such resist it, debbed "anti-cure", and the many people caught in the middle of the two.
In recent history, with scientists learning more about autism and possibly coming closer to a cure, some members of the "anti-cure" movement sent a letter to the United Nations demanding to be treated as a minority group rather than a group with a mental disability or disease.

There are numerous resources available for autistics from many groups.
Due to the fact that many autistics find it easier to communicate online then in person, many of these resources are available online.
In addition, sometimes successful autistic adults in a local community will help out children with autism, much in the way a master would help out an apprentice, for example.
Main article: autistic culture

With the recent increases in autism rates, a bit of an autistic culture has begun to develop.
Autistic culture is much akin to deaf culture, which says that autism is a unique way of being and not a disorder to be cured, i.e. "anti-cure".
There are some commonalities which are specific to autism in general as a culture, not just "autistic culture".
It is a common misperception that people with autism do not marry; many do get married.
Often, it is to another person with autism, although this is not always the case.
Many times this due to shared interests or obsessions, but more often than not its due to more compatability with personality types.
Multi-generational autistic families have also recently become a bit more common.
Interests with autistic people and geeks or nerds can often overlap as autistic people can sometimes become preoccupied with certain subjects much like the variant normal behaviour geeks experience.
However, in practice many autistic people have difficulty with working in groups, which impairs them even in the "techinical" of situations.
Some autistic adults are able to work successfully in mainstream jobs, usually those with high-functioning autism or Asperger's syndrome.
Nevertheless, communication and social programs often cause difficulties in many areas of the autistic's life.

"abnormal social interaction": Autistic people are capable of socializing very well with each other and even like minded people who are not Autistic.
When Autistic people have a ratio of 1 out of 166, they are going to appear reclusive.
They are naturally going to want to keep away from people who don't understand them.
People have a right to seek their own preferences.
But whatever an Autistic person decides to do, it is declared abnormal.

"Abnormal patterns of behaviour": This all comes down to communication.
If an Autistic person cannot communicate at all, the top priority should be to help them to communicate.
If they are capable of communicating, then they get labeled with "Abnormal communication ability" because they are not delivering eye contact and expressive body language along with their words.
When they are capable of expressing their needs, and they get ignored and not taken seriously, they become frustrated.
When the Autistic person becomes frustrated from not being heard, they will continue to be ignored which will result in frustrating them even more.
Then the Autistic person gets labeled with "Abnormal patterns of behavior".

In summary: Understand that an Autistic person does not want behaviour modification treatment.
They don't like their individual personality traits being interpreted as being abnormal.
It is extremely frustrating for them when they are not heard and understood.
The key to the whole Autism treatment deal is communication.
They don't want a disability in communication to be interpreted as a mental or a thinking disorder.
Approach the Autistic person as having a communications disability, not a behavior problem.
Understand that they have a lot to say from their point of view.
The person who communicates with an Autistic person must first overcome their own communications disability by learning how to listen to another person's words when they are delivered without eye contact and expressive body language.
Help an Autistic person to express their words with or without whatever communications aid they may need.
When they are capable of communicating, just listen to what they have to say without judging them for having lack of eye contact and expressive body language.

If you ask an Autistic person, they will tell you that the best treatment for them is to be treated as an equal person, not as second class citizens.
An Autistic person has an abundance of experiences when they are treated with prejudice biases.
Let them have a level playing field so that they can have opportunities to be contributors on this planet.
(Specific example, let these words that came from an Autistic person stay in the "Autism" entry in Wikipedia.)

Betsy Says: Autism is a complex developmental disability that typically appears during the first three years of life and is the result of a neurological disorder that affects the normal functioning of the brain, impacting development in the areas of social interaction and communication skills.
Both children and adults with autism typically show difficulties in verbal and non-verbal communication, social interactions, and leisure or play activities.
One should keep in mind however, that autism is a spectrum disorder and it affects each individual differently and at varying degrees - this is why early diagnosis is so crucial.
By learning the signs, a child can begin benefiting from one of the many specialized intervention programs.
Autism is one of five disorders that falls under the umbrella of Pervasive Developmental Disorders (PDD), a category of neurological disorders characterized by “severe and pervasive impairment in several areas of development.” The five disorders under PDD are: •	Autistic Disorder  •	Asperger's Disorder  •	Childhood Disintegrative Disorder (CDD)  •	Rett's Disorder  •	PDD-Not Otherwise Specified (PDD-NOS) Each of these disorders has specific diagnostic criteria which been outlined in the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic & Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV-TR).
Prevalence of Autism Autism is the most common of the Pervasive Developmental Disorders, affecting an estimated 1 in 166 births (Centers for Disease Control Prevention, 2004).
Roughly translated, this means as many as 1.5 million Americans today are believed to have some form of autism.
And this number is on the rise.
Based on statistics from the U.S. Department of Education and other governmental agencies, autism is growing at a startling rate of 10-17 percent per year.
At this rate, the ASA estimates that the prevalence of autism could reach 4 million Americans in the next decade.
Autism knows no racial, ethnic, social boundaries, family income, lifestyle, or educational levels and can affect any family, and any child.
And although the overall incidence of autism is consistent around the globe, it is four times more prevalent in boys than in girls.

Education: Educating children with autism is a challenge for both parents and teachers.
These children are individuals first and foremost with unique strengths and weaknesses.
Some may be of average to above average intelligence, while others may be below average.
Academic goals need to be tailored to that individual's intellectual ability and functioning level.

Improving Educational Opportunities Educating children with autism is a challenge for both parents and teachers.
Each child with autism has unique strengths and weaknesses, and if taught properly by trained teachers using evidence-based practices, they can develop to their full academic potential.
Academic goals need to be tailored to each individual's ability and functioning level, and teachers need to know how to differentiate instruction, modify materials and use positive behavior supports so students with autism can succeed.
There are several federal laws that protect children with autism, and their families, by ensuring that students have individualized education plans that are tailored to their specific needs.
These laws are a critical underpinning for our public school system, but more can be done to improve educational opportunities for students with autism.
The Teacher Education for Autistic Children (TEACH) Act  The TEACH Act of 2005 is intended to enhance educational services for persons with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and to do so in a manner generally consistent with and supportive of the IACC’s ASD Roadmap.
The ASD Roadmap is a blueprint to enhance and expand a broad range of services for children, youth and adults with ASD and their families, and to coordinate services across systems.
These are the key provisions of the TEACH Act:  •	Providing a loan forgiveness program for teachers of children with autism  •	Directing the Department of Education and the Administration on Children and Families to develop an outreach plan for populations and individuals underserved by early screening and diagnosis  •	Asking for local educational agencies to report on early intervention activities  •	Providing a sense of Congress that the Secretary of Education in making awards or grants under part D of the IDEA, should give special consideration to the increased incidence of autism and the unique characteristics of autistic students  •	Creating a task force of teachers, representatives of national groups, and individuals with autism and family members to review standards for teachers of students with autism, to study effectiveness of existing teaching models and to conduct an evaluation of state and local education agencies; a final report of the task force will provide the assessments conducted and proposed recommendations  •	Requiring a report on educational services provided to individuals with ASD under the IDEA and Head Start, and also asking for a special section on postsecondary, vocational, technical and adult education programs to provide assistance to individuals with ASD  In addition to passage of the TEACH Act, ASA believes that Congress should: •	In response to recent Supreme Court cases, pass legislation placing the burden of proof on school systems in disputes over Individualized Education Programs (IEPs) and allowing payment for expert fees in such disputes  Include adequate funding for the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) and No Child Left Behind Act (NCLB) in the Labor, Health and Human Services, Education appropriations to ensure that their provisions and protections can be effectively implemented, monitored and enforced

The Quality Services for Autism Community (QSAC) Adult Clinical Services is redefining the current treatment model.
Although research has generated increasing information about neurological and genetic factors in determining Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), medical and genetic research have not yet created a framework for the development of intervention strategies.
Since autism has been a behaviorally defined disorder, behavioral approaches were the first interventions implemented and remain the predominant form of interventions.
Taking into consideration that most of the experts on autism have concluded that autism occurs as a result of biological conditions physical factors such as biochemical imbalances, neurological (brain) damage and genetic accidents, we need to build a “road map” to understanding what strategies are effective and best for QSAC’s consumers.
Today’s current autism treatment is predicated on a holistic model.
Dr. Margaret Bauman, a leading researcher in autism from the Autism Treatment Network (ATN) and Boston University’s Medical School, suggests a multidisciplinary approach that focuses not only on behavioral intervention, physical therapy and speech therapy, but on the overall health of the consumer in designing a treatment.
For instance, when Dr. Bauman saw a consumer crying and twisting her body, symptoms that others doctor attributed to maladaptive behaviors or autism, Dr. Bauman sent the consumer to a gastroenterologist, who found ulcers in her esophagus.
The consumers’ “maladaptive behaviors” were caused by pain.
Additionally, Dr. Bauman’s case of a boy’s head banging went away after he was treated for colitis.

At QSAC we are adopting a neurobehavioral approach (a holistic model), which views autism as a condition resulting in part from heredity, a dysfunction in brain development, history of health, and learned behaviors.
This approach tells us that human function, which is controlled by the central nervous system and more specifically the brain, can be changed through cerebral stimulation and improving health conditions.
A review of scientific literature reveals that the human brain displays plasticity, meaning that with specific stimulation, the function, structure and even chemistry of the brain and central nervous system can change.
If we can evaluate what neurological or health imbalance is causing problems in development and if we could find the appropriate stimulation that can impact that development, we can help improve the development and function of the consumer.

Rather than looking at each area of development individually, this approach reviews all the possible facets affecting behavior.
Neurobehavioral interventions do not solely depend on the knowledge of the mechanisms of behavioral changes, but it also requires the understanding of the environmental context of behavior history and health conditions, present/past history of reinforcement, social/cognitive growth.
The neurobehavioral model evaluates where an individual is functioning in comparison to the developmental profile at his or her respective age.
The developmental profile shows the normal progression of development as it relates to tactility, auditory, visual, language, manual, and mobility.
The neurobehavioral model evaluates the autism curriculum and its components, such as memory, processing skills, social recognition, neuro-motor function, and communication.
The model results are combined with parental information regarding the individual's history, health, diet, and any other parental concerns.
This model uses the consumer’s strengths in behavior and skills to improve the consumer’s weaknesses.
All autistic individuals vary widely in their neurobehavioral developmental strength and weaknesses, and this variation has powerful implications for how best to teach new skills.
For instance, an individual who does not process auditory sequential information will be limited in their ability to follow directions, stay on task, and keep up with normal conversation.
Finally, an individualized treatment plan, or plan of action, is based on the conglomeration of this information.
(QSAC)www.qsac.com - Dr. Francisco Monegro.)