In an earlier and less popular version of the story, Thetis anointed the boy in ambrosia and put him on top of a fire to burn away the mortal parts of his body.
She was interrupted by Peleus and abandoned both father and son in a rage.
Peleus gave him to Chiron to raise.

Achilles took twenty-three towns outside Troy, including Lyrnessos, where he captured Briseis to keep as a concubine.
Meanwhile, Agamemnon took a woman named Chryseis and taunted her father, Chryses, a priest of Apollo, when he attempted to buy her back.
Apollo sent a plague through the Greek armies and Agamemnon was forced to give Chryseis back to her father.
He took Briseis as compensation.
Achilles and Agamemnon argued and Achilles refused to fight any longer; Patroclus donned his armor and took his place and was killed by Hector (who also took Achilles' armor).
Enraged, Achilles killed Hector (after his mother acquired new armor from Hephaestus and Hector was injured by Ajax) and dragged his body around Troy three times before allowing Priam to bury it.

Achilles' armor was the object of a fued between Odysseus and Ajax.
They competed for it and Odysseus won.

In the lost epic Aithiopis, a continuation of the Iliad written by Arktinus of Miletos, Achilles’ mother Thetis returned to mourn him and removed his ashes from the pyre and took them to Leuce at the mouths of the Danube.
There the Achaeans raised a tumulus for him and celebrated funeral games.
Pliny's Natural History (IV.27.1) mentions a tumulus that is no longer evident (Insula Achillis tumulo eius viri clara), on the island consecrated to him, located at a distance of fifty Roman miles from Peuce by the Danube Delta, and the temple there.
Pausanias has been told that the island is "covered with forests and full of animals, some wild, some tame.
In this island there is also Achilles’ temple and his statue” (III.19.11).
Ruins of a square temple 30 meters to a side, possibly that dedicated to Achilles, were discovered by Captain Kritzikly in 1823, but there has been no modern archeology done on the island.

Pomponius Mela tells that Achilles is buried in the island named Achillea, between Boristhene and Ister (De situ orbis, II, 7).
And the Greek geographer Dionysius Periegetus of Bithynia, who lived at the time of Domitian, writes that the island was called Leuce "because the wild animals which live there are white.
It is said that there, in Leuce island, reside the souls of Achilles and other heroes, and that they wander through the uninhabited valleys of this island; this is how Jove rewarded the men who had distinguished themselves through their virtues, because through virtue they had acquired everlasting honor” (Orbis descriptio, v. 541, quoted in Densuşianu 1913).

The Periplus of the Euxine Sea gives the following details: "It is said that the goddess Thetis raised this island from the sea, for her son Achilles, who dwells there.
Here is his temple and his statue, an archaic work.
This island is not inhabited, and goats graze on it, not many, which the people who happen to arrive here with their ships, sacrifice to Achilles.
In this temple are also deposited a great many holy gifts, craters, rings and precious stones, offered to Achilles in gratitude.
One can still read inscriptions in Greek and Latin, in which Achilles is praised and celebrated.
Some of these are worded in Patroclus’ honor, because those who wish to be favored by Achilles, honor Patroclus at the same time.
There are also in this island countless numbers of sea birds, which look after Achilles’ temple.
Every morning they fly out to sea, wet their wings with water, and return quickly to the temple and sprinkle it.
And after they finish the sprinkling, they clean the hearth of the temple with their wings.
Other people say still more, that some of the men who reach this island, come here intentionally.
They bring animals in their ships, destined to be sacrificed.
Some of these animals they slaughter, others they set free on the island, in Achilles’ honor.
But there are others, who are forced to come to this island by sea storms.
As they have no sacrificial animals, but wish to get them from the god of the island himself, they consult Achilles’ oracle.
They ask permission to slaughter the victims chosen from among the animals that graze freely on the island, and to deposit in exchange the price which they consider fair.
But in case the oracle denies them permission, because there is an oracle here, they add something to the price offered, and if the oracle refuses again, they add something more, until at last, the oracle agrees that the price is sufficient.
And then the victim doesn’t run away any more, but waits willingly to be caught.
So, there is a great quantity of silver there, consecrated to the hero, as price for the sacrificial victims.
To some of the people who come to this island, Achilles appears in dreams, to others he would appear even during their navigation, if they were not too far away, and would instruct them as to which part of the island they would better anchor their ships”.
(quoted in Densuşianu)

Achilles from Leuce island was venerated as Pontarches the lord and master of the Pontic (Black) Sea, the protector of sailors and navigation.
Sailors went out of their way to offer sacrifice.
To Achilles of Leuce were dedicated a number of important commercial port cities of the Greek waters: Achilleion in Messenia (Stephanus Byzantinus), Achilleios in Laconia (Pausanias, III.25,4) Nicolae Densuşianu (Densuşianu 1913) even thought he recognized Achilles in the name of Aquileia and in the north arm of the Danube delta, the arm of Chilia ("Achileii"), though his conclusion, that Leuce had sovereign rights over Pontos, evokes modern rather than archaic sea-law."

Leuce had also a reputation as a place of healing.
Pausanias (III.19,13) reports that the Delphic Pythia sent a lord of Croton to be cured of a chest wound.
Ammianus Marcellinus (XXII.8) attributes the healing to waters (aquae) on the island.