Lincoln was born on February 12, 1809, on a farm in LaRue County, Kentucky (* then Hardin Co., three miles south of the town of Hodgenville), to Thomas Lincoln and Nancy Hanks.
Lincoln moved at a young age to Indiana, then later to New Salem, Illinois.He served as a captain in the U.S. Army during the Black Hawk War.
He later tried his hand at several business and political ventures.
He was highly regarded as a practicing lawyer.
Lincoln served four terms in the Illinois State Legislature, was briefly elected to Congress (1846), and had a successful law practice in Illinois both before and after his single term in the House of Representatives.
It is commonly held that Lincoln had bipolar disorder, which greatly moderated after his marriage to Mary Ann Todd in 1842.
Some scholars have suggested that Lincoln enjoyed a romantic relationship with his roommate and longtime friend, shopkeeper Joshua Speed.

Another important example of Lincoln's skills as a railroad lawyer was a lawsuit over a tax exemption that the state granted to the Illinois Central Railroad.
McLean County argued that the state had no authority to grant such an exemption, and it sought to impose taxes on the railroad notwithstanding.
In January 1856, the Illinois Supreme Court delivered its opinion upholding the tax exemption, accepting Lincoln's arguments.

During his unsuccessful 1858 campaign for the United States Senate against Stephen A. Douglas, Lincoln debated Douglas in a series of events which represented a national discussion on the issues that were about to split the nation in two.
The Lincoln-Douglas debates presaged the Presidential election of 1860, in which Douglas and Lincoln were once again opponents.
On November 6, 1860, Lincoln was elected as the 16th President of the United States, the first Republican to hold that office.

Shortly after his election, the South made it clear that secession was inevitable, which greatly increased tension across the nation.
President-elect Lincoln survived an assassination attempt in Baltimore, Maryland, and on February 23, 1861 arrived secretly in disguise to Washington, DC.
The South ridiculed Lincoln for this seemingly cowardly act, but the efforts at security may have been prudent.

At Lincoln's inauguration on March 4, 1861, the Turners formed Lincoln's bodyguard; and a sizable garrison of federal troops was always present, ready to protect the president and the capital from rebel invasion.
Lincoln's actual position on freeing enslaved African-Americans is controversial today, despite the frequency and clarity with which he stated it both before his election to president (i.e. Lincoln-Douglas Debates of 1858) and after (see Lincoln's First Inaugural) He stated his position forcefully and succinctly in a letter to Horace Greeley of August 22, 1862.
However, at the time of the writing this letter, Lincoln was already leaning towards emancipation, which would lead to the Emancipation Proclamation.

Also revealing was his letter a year later to James Conkling of August 26, 1863, which included the following excerpt: Lincoln is often credited with freeing enslaved African-Americans with the Emancipation Proclamation, though this only freed the slaves in areas of the Confederacy not yet controlled by the Union; in occupied and northern territories, slaves were not freed.
However, the proclamation made abolishing slavery in the rebel states an official war goal and it did become the impetus for the enactment of the 13th and 14th Amendments of the United States Constitution which respectively abolished slavery and established the federal enforcement of civil rights.
He showed tremendous leadership to the Union populace during the war as evidenced by the Gettysburg Address, a speech dedicating a cemetery of Union soldiers from the Battle of Gettysburg in 1863.
While most of the speakers—e.g.
Edward Everett—at the event spoke at length, some for hours, Lincoln's few choice words resonated across the nation and across history, defying Lincoln's own prediction that "The world will little note, nor long remember what we say here."
While there is little documentation of the other speeches of the day, Lincoln's address is regarded as one of the great speeches in history.
The war was a source of constant frustration for the president, and it occupied nearly all of his time.
After repeated frustrations with General George McClellan and a string of other unsuccessful commanding generals, Lincoln made the fateful decision to appoint a radical and somewhat scandalous army commander: General Ulysses S. Grant.
Grant would apply his military knowledge and leadership talents to bring about the close of the Civil War.

In 1864, Lincoln was the first and only President to face a presidential election during a civil war.
The long war and the issue of emancipation appeared to be severely hampering his prospects and an electoral defeat appeared likely against the Democratic nominee, George McClellan.
However, a series of timely Union victories shortly before election day changed the situation dramatically and Lincoln was reelected.

During the Civil War, Lincoln held powers no previous president had wielded; he suspended the writ of habeas corpus and frequently imprisoned Southern spies and sympathizers without trial.
On the other hand, he often commuted executions.Lincoln met frequently with Grant as the war ended.
The two men planned matters of reconstruction, and it was evident to all that the two men held one another in high regard.
During their last meeting, on April 14, 1865 (Good Friday), Lincoln invited General Grant to a social engagement for that evening.
Grant declined (his wife was not eager to spend time with Mary Todd Lincoln).

Without the General and his wife, or his bodyguard Ward Hill Lamon, to whom he related his famous dream of his own assassination, the Lincolns left to attend a play at Ford's Theater.
The play was Our American Cousin, a musical comedy by the British writer Tom Taylor (1817-1880).
As Lincoln sat in the balcony, John Wilkes Booth, an actor and Southern sympathizer from Virginia, crept up behind Lincoln in his State Box and aimed a single-shot, round-slug.44 caliber derringer at the President's head, firing at point-blank range.
He shouted "Sic semper tyrannis!"
(Latin: "Thus always to tyrants," and Virginia's state motto; some versions say he said "The south is avenged!")
and jumped from the balcony to the stage below, breaking his leg in the fall.

The conspirators had planned to kill a number of other government officials at the same time, but for various reasons Lincoln's was the only assassination actually carried out.
Booth managed to limp to his horse and escape, and the mortally wounded president was taken to a house across the street, now called the Petersen House, where he lay in a coma for some time before he quietly expired.
Abraham Lincoln was officially pronounced dead at 7:21 AM, in April 15, 1865.

Booth and several of his companions were eventually captured and either hanged or imprisoned.
Booth himself was shot when discovered holed up in a barn.
Four people were tried by military tribunal and hanged for the assassination (David Herold, George Atzerodt, Lewis Powell (aka Lewis Payne), and Mary Surratt, the first woman ever executed in the United States.)
Three people were sentenced to life imprisonment (Michael O'Laughlin, Samuel Arnold, and Samuel Mudd).
Edman Spangler was sentenced to six years imprisonment.
John Surratt, tried later by a civilian court, was acquitted.
The fairness of the convictions, particularly of Mary Surratt, have been called into question, and there are doubts as to the exact degree of her involvement, if any, in the conspiracy.

Lincoln's body was carried by train in a grand funeral procession through several states on its way back to Illinois.
The nation mourned a man who many viewed as the savior of the United States, and protector and defender of what Lincoln himself called "the government of the people, by the people, and for the people."
Critics say that in fact the Confederates were the ones defending the right to self-governance and Lincoln was suppressing that right.
They further insist that Lincoln only preserved the union in a geographical sense while destroying its voluntary nature.
President Lincoln and Mary Todd Lincoln had four sons.
Only one survived into adulthood.Lincoln has no living descendants.
Lincoln was buried in Oak Ridge Cemetery in Springfield where a 177-foot tall granite tomb surmounted with several bronze statues of Lincoln was constructed by 1874.
Lincoln's wife and three of his four sons are also buried there (Robert is buried in Arlington National Cemetery).
In the years following his death, attempts were made to steal Lincoln's body and hold it for ransom.
Around 1900, Robert Todd Lincoln decided that, in order to prevent body theft, it was necessary to build a permanent crypt for his father.
Lincoln's coffin would be encased in concrete several feet thick, surrounded by a cage, and buried beneath a rock slab.
On September 26, 1901, Lincoln's body was exhumed so that it could be reinterred in the newly built crypt.
However, those present (there were 23 of them, including Robert Lincoln) feared that his body might have been stolen in the intervening years.
They decided to open the coffin and check.

When they did, they were amazed at the sight.
Lincoln's body was almost perfectly preserved.
It had been embalmed so many times following his death that his body had not decayed.
In fact, he was perfectly recognizable, even more than thirty years after his death.
On his chest, they could see red, white, and blue specs — remnants of the American flag with which he was buried, which had by then disintegrated.