In 1947, as a "friendly witness" in the House Committee on Un-American Activities, Rand testified against the activities of communist propagandists in Hollywood.
Rands testimony involved analysis of the 1943 film Song to Russia, which grossly misrepresented the socioeconomic conditions in the Soviet Union.
The film presented Russia as an amazing paradise of comfort, beauty and plenty for everybody, when in reality the conditions of the average Russian peasant farmer were appalling.
Apparently this 1943 film was intentional wartime propaganda, to keep the US public happy in their allegiance with Russia.
When asked later about her feelings on the HUAC hearings, she described the hearings as "futile".

In 1951 Rand met the young psychology student Nathaniel Branden, who had read her book The Fountainhead at the age of 14.
Branden, now 18, enjoyed discussing Rand's emerging Objectivist philosophy with her.
Branden's relationship with Rand eventually took on romantic aspects, though they were both married at the time.

Rand published her "magnum opus", Atlas Shrugged in 1957.
This also became a best seller.
According to a joint survey conducted in 1991 by the Library of Congress and the Book of the Month Club, Atlas Shrugged is recognised as the "second most influential book for Americans today", after The Bible by numerous authors.
The same survey also listed Atlas Shrugged as the second of "25 books that have most shaped readers lives", after The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn, by Mark Twain.

Ayn Rand (Ayn rhymes with "mine"), born Alissa Zinovievna Rosenbaum (February 2, 1905 - March 6, 1982), was a controversial American philosopher and novelist, most famous for her philosophy of Objectivism.
Her philosophy and her fiction both emphasize above all the human individual and the genius he is capable of.
Her novels were based upon the Randian hero, a man whose genius leads others to reject him, but who nonetheless perseveres to prove himself.
Rand viewed this hero as the "ideal man" and made it the express goal of her literature to show these men.

Ayn Rand was born to Jewish parents in Saint Petersburg, Russia.
She studied philosophy and history at the University of Petrograd.
In late 1925 she was granted a visa to visit with American relatives.
She arrived in the U.S. in February 1926, at the age of 21.
After a brief stay with them in Chicago, she resolved never to return to the USSR and set out for Los Angeles to become a screenwriter.
She then changed her name to Ayn Rand, partly to avoid Soviet retaliation against her family for her anti-socialist views.

Rand's first major success came with the best-selling novel The Fountainhead (1943).
The manuscript for this book was difficult to get into print.
It was initially taken from publisher to publisher, collecting rejection slips as it went, before it was picked up by the Bobbs-Merrill Company publishing house.
The book was so successful that the royalties and movie rights made Rand famous and financially secure.

In 1947, as a "friendly witness" for the House Committee on Un-American Activities, Rand warned against Communist propagandists in Hollywood.
Rand's testimony involved analysis of the 1943 film Song of Russia.
Rand testified that the movie grossly misrepresented the socioeconomic conditions in the Soviet Union.
She told the committee that the film presented Russia as if it were an amazing paradise of comfort, beauty and plenty for everybody.
However, she said, in reality the conditions of the average Russian peasant farmer were appalling.
Apparently this 1943 film was intentional wartime propaganda by US patriots.
The movie was, at the time, intended to provide comfort to the US public during the American-Soviet alliance during World War II.
After the HUAC hearings, when Ayn Rand was asked about her feelings on the effectiveness of their investigations, she described the process as "futile."

Rand's political views were extremely anti-communist, anti-statist, and pro-capitalist.
Her writings praised the "heroic" American values of independence and individuality.
Her fiction writings often told stories of educated, successful Americans who found their lives unfairly burdened with the hassles of taxation, bureaucracy and other forms of heavy-handed government interference.
Rand also had a strong dislike for organized religion and compulsory charity, both of which she believed helped foster a culture of guilt in successful people.

In 1951 Rand met the young psychology student Nathaniel Branden, who had read her book The Fountainhead at the age of 14.
Branden, now 19, enjoyed discussing Rand's emerging Objectivist philosophy with her.
Branden's relationship with Rand eventually took on romantic and sexual aspects, though they were both married at the time.

Rand published the book described as her "magnum opus", Atlas Shrugged in 1957.
This book, as with The Fountainhead also became a best seller.
According to a joint survey conducted in 1991 by the Library of Congress and the Book of the Month Club, Atlas Shrugged is recognized as the "second most influential book for Americans today", after The Bible by numerous authors.
It is also named as one of the "25 books that have most shaped readers lives" in a 1995–1996 list developed with the theme "Shape Your Future—READ!"
Along with Branden, Rand launched the Objectivist movement to promote her philosophy, which she termed Objectivism.

Rand's philosophical alliances were few.
She acknowledged an intellectual debt to Aristotle and occasionally remarked with approval on specific philosophical positions of e.g. Baruch Spinoza and Thomas Aquinas; she seems also to have respected American rationalist Brand Blanshard.
However, she regarded most philosophers (throughout history, not only her contemporaries) as at least incompetent and at most positively evil, singling out Immanuel Kant as the most influential of the latter sort.
In general, her treatment of other philosophers is one of the reasons her own nonfiction is sometimes dismissed as pseudophilosophy.

Rand broke with both Nathaniel Branden and his wife Barbara Branden in 1968.
Ayn Rand described the break to be the result of her finding out about behavior incompatible with the tenets of her Objectivist philosophy.
The Brandens later said that the final break was triggered by Rand finding out about another romantic relationship of Nathaniel Branden.

Ayn Rand died on March 6, 1982 and was interred in the Kensico Cemetery, Valhalla, New York.
The Ayn Rand Institute, Center for the Advancement of Objectivism has since registered the name Ayn Rand as a trademark, despite Ayn Rand's desire that her name never be used to promote the philosophy she developed.
During her life Ayn Rand expressed her wishes to keep her name and the philosophy of Objectivism separate.
It is understood that this was in order to assure the continued survival of the philosophy she developed once her own life was over.

Leonard Peikoff is Rand's sole heir, and as such, he inherited her copyrights and manuscripts.
He calls himself her "intellectual heir", and it is a widely held, though often challenged belief, that she gave him that title, intending him to be an official leader of the Objectivist movement after her death.
While he claims to be promoting and naturally extending her philosophy, some scholars see him as espousing his own philosophy, one that some argue Rand herself may not have agreed with were she still alive.

In 1989, a schism in the movement occurred.
Objectivist David Kelley wrote an article called "A Question of Sanction," in which he defended his choice to speak to non-Objectivist libertarian groups.
Kelley said that Objectivism was not a "closed system" and condoned tolerance of and intellectual debate with other philosophies.
Peikoff, in an article for The Intellectual Activist called "Fact and Value", said that Objectivism is, in fact, closed and that factual truth and moral goodness are intrinsically related.
Peikoff essentially expelled Kelley from the Objectivist movement, and Kelley founded The Institute for Objectivist Studies (now known as The Objectivist Center ) in Poughkeepsie, New York.

Ayn Rand (February 2, 1905–March 6, 1982; first name rhymes with "mine"), born Alissa "Alice" Zinovievna Rosenbaum, was a controversial American novelist and philosopher, most famous for her philosophy of Objectivism, and her novels The Fountainhead and Atlas Shrugged.
Her philosophy and her fiction both emphasize above all her notions of individualism, egoism, "rational self-interest," and capitalism.
Her novels were based upon the archetype of the "Randian hero," a man whose genius leads others to reject him, but who nonetheless perseveres to prove himself superior.
Rand viewed this hero as the "ideal man" and made it the express goal of her literature to showcase these men.
Ayn Rand was born to Jewish parents in Saint Petersburg, Russia.
She studied philosophy and history at the University of Petrograd.
In late 1925 she was granted a visa to visit American relatives.
She arrived in the United States in February 1926, at the age of 21.
After a brief stay with them in Chicago, she resolved never to return to the Soviet Union and set out for Los Angeles to become a screenwriter.
She then changed her name to "Ayn Rand," partly to avoid Soviet retaliation against her family for her political views (she assumed her name would appear in the credits of films with an anti-Communist message, attracting the attention of Soviet officials).
While there is a well-known rumor that she named herself after the Remington Rand typewriter, recent evidence suggests that this is not the case.

Initially, Rand struggled in Hollywood and took odd jobs to pay her basic living-expenses.
While working as an extra on Cecil B. DeMille's King of Kings she intentionally bumped into an aspiring young actor, Frank O'Connor who caught her eye.
The two were subsequently married in 1929.

Rand's first major professional success came with her best-selling novel The Fountainhead (1943).
The novel was rejected by many publishers before finally being accepted by the Bobbs-Merrill Company publishing house.
Despite these initial struggles The Fountainhead was successful, bringing Rand notoriety and financial security.

In 1947, during the infamous Red Scare Rand testified as a "friendly witness" before the House Committee on Un-American Activities.. Rand's testimony involved analysis of the 1943 film Song of Russia.
Rand argued that the movie grossly misrepresented the socioeconomic conditions in the Soviet Union.
She told the committee that the film presented life in the USSR as being much better than it actually was.
Apparently this 1943 film was intentional wartime propaganda by U.S. patriots, trying to put their Soviet allies in World War II under the best possible light.
After the HUAC hearings, when Ayn Rand was asked about her feelings on the effectiveness of their investigations, she described the process as "futile."

Rand's political views were extremely anti-communist, anti-statist, and pro-capitalist.
Her writings praised above all the human individual and the creative genius of which he is capable.
She exalted what she saw as the heroic American values of egoism and individualism.
Rand also had a strong dislike for organized religion and compulsory charity, both of which she believed helped foster a crippling culture of resentment towards individual human happiness, flourishment, and success.

In 1951 Rand met the young psychology student Nathaniel Branden, who had read her book The Fountainhead at the age of 14.
Branden, by then 19, enjoyed discussing Rand's emerging Objectivist philosophy with her.
After several years, Rand and Branden's friendly relationship blossomed into a romantic affair (despite the fact that both were married at the time).
After a convoluted series of separations and additional affairs, Rand abruptly ended her relationship with both Nathaniel Branden and his wife Barbara Branden in 1968 when she learned of Nathaniel Branden's affair with Patrecia Scott (this later affair did not overlap chronologically with the Branden/Rand affair).
Rand refused to have any further dealings with NBI.
Rand then published a letter in "The Objectivist" announcing her repudiation of Branden for various reasons, including dishonesty, but did not mention their affair or her role in the schism.

Rand published the book described as her magnum opus, Atlas Shrugged in 1957.
This book, just as The Fountainhead had, also became a bestseller.
It is also named as one of the "25 books that have most shaped readers lives" in a 1995–1996 list developed with the theme "Shape Your Future—READ!"
Atlas Shrugged is often seen as Rand's most complete statement of Objectivist philosophy in any of her works of fiction.
Along with Nathaniel and Barbara Branden as well as a hand full of others (known as "The Collective"), Rand launched the Objectivist movement to promote her philosophy, which she termed Objectivism.

Rand rejected virtually all other philosophical schools.
She acknowledged an intellectual debt to Aristotle and occasionally remarked with approval on specific philosophical positions of, e.g., Baruch Spinoza and Thomas Aquinas.
She seems also to have respected the American rationalist Brand Blanshard.
However, she regarded most philosophers as at best incompetent and at worst positively evil.
She singled out Immanuel Kant as the most influential of the latter sort.
Her rejection of other philosophers may have contributed to acadamia's labeling of her own nonfiction work as pseudophilosophy.

Nonetheless, there are connections between Rand's views and those of other philosophers.
She admitted that she had been influenced at an early age by the writings of Friedrich Nietzsche.
Though she later repudiated his thought, her own thought grew out of critical interaction with it.
It has been suggested that she was also influenced by dialectical thinkers such as Karl Marx in this way.
Strong similarities can be detected between her ethical views and the doctrines of Epicurus and the Stoics, and between her views on government and those of John Locke.
More generally, her political thought can be seen as fitting in the tradition of classical liberalism that includes William Graham Sumner, Herbert Spencer, Albert Jay Nock, Isabel Paterson, and Rose Wilder Lane.
She expressed qualified enthusiasm for the economic thought of Ludwig von Mises and Henry Hazlitt.
In metaphysics and epistemology, she was (again like John Locke) an empiricist realist: she tried to navigate a way between the Humean and positivist empiricisms of her day (e.g., as developed by Rudolf Carnap) and Platonic rationalism (as exhibited in the writings of Gottlob Frege and G. E. Moore).

Ayn Rand died on March 6, 1982 and was interred in the Kensico Cemetery, Valhalla, New York.
In 1985, Leonard Peikoff, Ayn Rand's designated legal and “intellectual” heir, established the Ayn Rand Institute, the Center for the Advancement of Objectivism.
The Institute has since registered the name Ayn Rand as a trademark, despite Ayn Rand's desire that her name never be used to promote the philosophy she developed.
During her life Ayn Rand expressed her wishes to keep her name and the philosophy of Objectivism separate.
It is understood that this was in order to assure the continued survival of the philosophy she developed once her own life was over.

In 1989, yet another schism in the movement occurred.
Objectivist David Kelley wrote an article called "A Question of Sanction," in which he defended his choice to speak to non-Objectivist libertarian groups.
Kelley said that Objectivism was not a "closed system" and condoned tolerance of and intellectual debate with other philosophies.
Peikoff, in an article for The Intellectual Activist called "Fact and Value", said that Objectivism is, in fact, closed and that factual truth and moral goodness are intrinsically related.
Peikoff "expelled" Kelley from his Objectivist movement.

Walker also claims that there are several similarities between Objectivism and Hubbard's Scientology: In contrast, Jim Peron's analysis of Objectivism supports the view that the philosophy is not a cult; Peron claims that similarities to cults are superficial at best and that charges of cultism directed at Objectivists are ad hominem smear terms used to discredit Objectivist ideas without refuting them.
He specifically attacks all claims to parallels between Objectivism and Scientology.
He also argues that many of Rand's most fervent critics (like Murray Rothbard) plagiarized her ideas; further, he argues that Shermer and Rothbard spread unsubstantiated rumors and falsehoods regarding Rand, in order to malign her unjustly.
Finally, he says, that the lack of an organized Objectivist group and the fact that Rand did not attempt to recruit Objectivists refute any claims that Objectiivsm is cult-like, writing: "I cannot see how a disembodied philosophy can be a cult.
I say Objectivism was disembodied because there was no Objectivist organization to join.
The Nathaniel Branden Institute gave lectures but had no membership.
You could subscribe to a newsletter but you couldn't join.
Objectivism was, and is, structureless.
And without a structure there cannot be cult.
Cults spend a great deal of time recruiting members and persuading them to join a structure.
A structure, or organization, is not optional.
It is an essential trait of a cult.
If the structure doesn't exist then there is no cult... Did Objectivism recruit members?
It doesn't seem so.
The obvious reason is that there was nothing to which members could be recruited.
The vast majority of self-proclaimed Objectivists are people who read Rand's works and agreed with her.
Most have never attended an Objectivist meeting nor subscribed to any Objectivist newsletter.
All they did was buy Rand's books and like them."
Without Rand's knowledge or permission, We The Living was made into a pair of films, Noi vivi and Addio, Kira in 1942 by Scalara Films, Rome.

Other philosophical criticism of Rand stems from her unconventional use of traditional philosophical concepts.
Rand described Objectivism as a crude form of direct realism, which to many seems like a mere redescription and recategorization of a preexisting philosophical concept.
Rand also tends to mix and confuse other vocabulary such that anyone with a background in philosophy might find it contradictory and disjointed with the accepted use of philosophical concepts.
For example, "axiomatic concepts" (a notion explored in "Introduction to Objectivistic Epistemology") might be considered a confusion of universals with concepts.
Because axioms are self-evident, universally accepted truths that are associated with objectivity, they shouldn't describe concepts, ideas that are inherently abstract, subjective, contingent, and relative; thus, the accusation that 'axiomatic concepts' is both oxymoronic and self-refuting is not without its philosophical basis.

Perhaps the most general objection to the claim that Rand is philosophical can be found with the very title of her philosophy, Objectivism.
According to Rand, something can be objective (universal) and yet won't exist without a concept of its existence.
That subverts the very notion of what is objective in the entire tradition of Western philosophy, which posits a notion of objectivity that is inherently unimpeachable and independent of human concepts and awareness.
This discordance renders her use of the word Objectivism completely atypical with the accepted use both historically and contemporaneously, which could explain the overt use of a capital 'O' when speaking of Objectivism as opposed to objectivity.

Another criticism stems from the fact that Rand chides pragmatists, or the general movement of pragmatism, and yet the first pragmatist, William James, called universal truths concepts--useful figments of our cognitive needs--and Rand said almost precisely the same thing in "Introduction to Objectivistic Epistemology," only she maintained that universals were indeed objective (unlike James, who asserted that they weren't objective by their very cognitive and conceptual nature).
To Rand, anything is Objective if it is a validly informed opinion or if it corresponds enough with reality (correpondence theory in epistemology, another preexisting philosophical concept).
Basically, according to Rand, something is true unless we can prove otherwise, something known as contingent truth to pragmatists--the exact same concept.
Rand, however, projected hatred towards pragmatists, and to an even greater extent, libertarians, both of whom share fundamental philosophical characteristics with Objectivism in spite of her personal aversions.

Rand's Objectivism encompasses positions on metaphysics, epistemology, ethics, politics, and aesthetics.
Listen to Rand explaining Objectivism) Along with Nathaniel Branden, his wife Barbara, and others including Alan Greenspan and Leonard Peikoff, (jokingly designated "The Collective"), Rand launched the Objectivist movement to promote her philosophy.
She was greatly influenced by Aristotle.
Some have observed parallels with Nietzsche, and she was vociferously opposed to some of the views of Kant.
Rand also claimed to share intellectual lineage with John Locke, who conceptualized the ideas that individuals "own themselves," have a right to the products of their own labor, and have natural rights to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness, and more generally with the philosophies of the Age of Enlightenment and the Age of Reason.
She occasionally remarked with approval on specific philosophical positions of, e.g., Baruch Spinoza and Thomas Aquinas, She seems also to have respected the 20th Century American rationalist Brand Blanshard, who, like Rand, believed that "there has been no period in the past two thousand years when reason and rationality have undergone a bombardment so varied, so competent, so massive and sustained as in the last half-century."

Rand's greatest influence was Aristotle, especially Organon ("Logic"); she considered Aristotle the greatest philosopher.
In particular, her philosophy reflects an Aristotelian epistemology and metaphysics — both Aristotle and Rand argued that "there exists an objective reality that is independent of mind and that is capable of being known."
Although Rand was ultimately critical of Aristotle's ethics, others have noted her egoistic ethics "is of the eudemonistic type, close to Aristotle's own...a system of guidelines required by human beings to live their lives successfully, to flourish, to survive as "man qua man."
Rand herself argued "that her philosophy diverges from Aristotle’s by considering essences as epistemological and contextual instead of as metaphysical.
She envisions Aristotle as a philosophical intuitivist who declared the existence of essences within concretes."
In her early life, Rand admired the work of Friedrich Nietzsche, and did share "Nietzsche's reverence for human potential and his loathing of Christianity and the philosophy of Immanuel Kant," but eventually became critical, seeing his philosophy as emphasizing emotion over reason and subjective interpretation of reality over actual reality.
There is debate about the extent of the relationship between Rand's views and Nietzsche's, and over what seemed to be an evolution of Rand's view of Nietzsche.
Allan Gotthelf, in On Ayn Rand, describes the first edition of We The Living as very sympathetic to Nietzschean ideas.
Bjorn Faulkner and Karen Andre, characters from The Night of January 16th, exemplify certain aspects of Nietzsche's views.
Ronald Merrill, author of The Ideas of Ayn Rand identified a passage in We the Living that Rand had omitted from the 1959 reprint: "In it, the heroine entertains (though finally rejects) sentiments explicitly attributed to Nietzche about the justice of sacrificing the weak for the strong."
Rand herself denied a close intellectual relationship with Nietzsche and characterized changes in later editions of We the Living as stylistic and grammatical.

The destruction of Gail Wynand in The Fountainhead is an example of her later view, a rejection of Nietzsche, that the great cannot succeed by sacrificing the masses: "her journals suggest a rejection of traditional false-alternative ethics.
Her May 15 entry, for example, identifies the error of Nietzscheans such as Gail Wynand: in trying to achieve power, they use the masses, but at the cost of their ideals and standards, and thus become "a slave to those masses."
The independent man, therefore, will not make his success dependent upon the masses."
In the end, Rand made peace with her changing views of Nietzsche and his influence, and the introduction to the 25th aniversary edition of The Fountainhead concludes with Nietzsche's statement, "The noble soul has reverence for itself."

Rand was deeply opposed to the philosophy of Immanuel Kant.
Their divergence is greatest in metaphysics and epistemology rather than the ethics of Kant's well known Categorical imperative (her critique of Kant's ethics is directly rooted in Kant's metaphysics and epistomology, and there is debate over whether the Categorical Imperative is compatible with Objectivism).
Rand and Kant had significantly different theories of concepts, identity and consciousness: In Objectivist epistemology reason is the highest virtue and reason and logic can be used to understand objective reality.
This is diametrically opposed to Kant's analytic-synthetic dichotomy, as Kant believed that metaphysics cannot talk about what exists ("things-in themselves") since it is unknowable, but rather must focus on what is experienced and how it is experienced.
In Rand's view, Kant's dichotomy severed rationality and reason from the real world — a betrayal of the very nature of man.
In Rand's words,  In the final issue of The Objectivist, she further wrote,  In 1950 Rand moved to 120 East 34th Street in New York City, and formed a group with the deliberately ironic name "The Collective," which included future Federal Reserve chairman Alan Greenspan and a young psychology student named Nathan Blumenthal (later Nathaniel Branden), who had been profoundly influenced by The Fountainhead.
According to Branden, "I wrote Miss Rand a letter in 1949...
I was invited to her home for a personal meeting in March, 1950, a month before I turned twenty."

The forthcoming PC and Xbox 360 game Bioshock takes place in the ruins of a city described as the ultimate capitalistic and individualist paradise.
Founded in 1946 by a Soviet expatriate named "Andrew Ryan" (clearly a wordplay on "Ayn Rand"), the city is an embodiment of the Randian ideal, although one that has fallen into ruin.
Within analytic philosophy, the dominant philosophical movement in the English-speaking world, Rand's work has been mostly ignored.
No leading research university in this tradition considers Rand or Objectivism to be an important philosophical specialty or research area.
Many adherents and practitioners of continental philosophy criticize her celebration of self-interest, so there has similarly been little focus on her work in this movement.
However there are fellowships for the study of Ayn Rand’s ideas at top-rated departments such as the University of Texas at Austin; at Ashland University in Ohio; and the University of Pittsburgh.
Courses of the Ayn Rand Institute’s Objectivist Academic Center are accredited, so students can get university credits for studying Objectivism.

Her supporters are trying to bring Rand's work into the academic mainstream.
For instance, the Ayn Rand Society, founded in 1987, is affiliated with the American Philosophical Association, and the Journal of Ayn Rand Studies promotes philosophical research related to Rand's views.
In a 1999 interview in the Chronicle of Higher Education, Rand scholar Chris Matthew Sciabarra said, "I know they laugh at Rand", while also noting a growing interest in her work in the academic community.
In 2006, Cambridge University Press published a volume on Rand's ethical theory written by ARI-affiliated scholar Tara Smith, a philosophy professor at the University of Texas at Austin.
One of the reasons for the prominence of Ayn Rand and Objectivism in the news and popular culture relative to other philosophical theories is the fact that there are dozens of student groups dedicated to promoting and studying the philosophy of Objectivism spread across the U.S., Australia, Canada, Israel, the Netherlands, New Zealand, and Norway.
These clubs often present controversial speakers on topics such as abortion, religion, and foreign policy, often allying with controversial conservative (and sometimes liberal) organizations to organize their events.
For example the NYU Objectivism Club hosted a joint panel on the Muhammad cartoons that received nationwide coverage for NYU's censorship of the cartoons.
There are several dozen speakers sponsored by the Ayn Rand Institute and other organizations, who give nationwide tours each year speaking about Objectivism.

The Ayn Rand Institute has spent more than $5M on educational programs advancing Objectivism, including scholarships and clubs.
These clubs often obtain educational materials and speakers from the ARI.
The Objectivist Club Association and ObjectivismOnline provide free hosting and organizational resources for Ayn Rand clubs.
There are also several conferences organized by various organizations, such as the Objectivist Conferences, which are attended by several hundred "new intellectuals" each summer for two weeks and feature dozens of philosophy courses and presentations of new publications and research.

Nozick is sympathetic to Rand's libertarian political conclusions, but he does not think her arguments justify them.
In particular, his essay criticizes her foundational argument in ethics, which claims that one's own life is, for each individual, the only ultimate value because it makes all other values possible.
Nozick says that to make this argument sound Rand still needs to explain why someone could not rationally prefer eventually dying and having no values.
Thus, he argues, her attempt to defend the morality of selfishness is essentially an instance of begging the question and that her solution to David Hume's famous is-ought problem is unsatisfactory.
Rand's novels, especially her magnum opus, Atlas Shrugged, met with mixed reviews.
They were derided by critics as overly long and repetitive philosophical tracts interspersed with low-quality melodrama.
Scholars of English and American literature have largely ignored her work.

Some critics have argued that Rand’s idealistic philosophy and her Romantic literary style are inconsistent with the nature and behavior of actual people.
In particular, these critics claim that Rand's novels are populated by unrealistic one-dimensional caricatures of the types of people she wants to praise or condemn.
The flawless Objectivist heroes, who are implausibly wealthy, intelligent, physically attractive and free of doubt, are arrayed against antagonists who are weak, pathetic, full of uncertainty, and lacking in imagination and talent.
Rand herself replied to these literary criticisms (in advance of many of them) with her 1963 essay "The Goal of My Writing," and in essays collected in The Romantic Manifesto: A Philosophy of Literature (2nd rev.
ed.
1975), in which she states the goal of her fiction is to project her vision of an ideal man: not man as he is, but man as he might and ought to be.
Further, defenders of Rand's novels have noted that many of her heroes are far from flawless, and that not all are wealthy.
They note that Rearden, the Wet Nurse, and Fred Kinnan suffer due to either moral flaws or errors in reasoning; further, they point out that not all of the villains in Rand's novels are weak and pathetic: Ellsworth Toohey is portrayed as a masterful communicator, critic, and manipulator, while Robert Stadler is a brilliant scientist.
A notable exception to the general lack of attention paid to Rand in philosophy is the essay "On the Randian Argument" by renowned Harvard University philosopher Robert Nozick, which appears in his collection Socratic Puzzles.