He is also vocal in support of the Equalization of Opportunity Bill.Betty Pope is a wealthy socialite who is having a meaningless sexual affair with James Taggart that coincides with the overall meaninglessness of her life.
She is deliberately crude in a way that casts ridicule on her high social position.Brakeman is an unnamed employee working on the Taggart Comet train.
Dagny Taggart hears Brakeman whistling the theme of a concerto.
When she asks him what piece it's from, he says Halley's Fifth Concerto.
When Dagny points out that Richard Halley only wrote four concertos, Brakeman claims he made a mistake and he doesn't recall where he heard the piece.

It is later discovered that the unknown brakeman is none other than John Galt himself.
This is learned because has been having lunch with him for years, and recognizes Galt's voice during his extended speech on the radio.Claude Slagenhop is the president of Friends of Global Progress and one of Lillian Rearden's friends.
He believes that ideas are just air, that this is no time for talk, but of action.
He is not bothered by the fact that action unguided by ideas is random and pointless.
Dagny Taggart  Dan Conway  Eddie Willers  Ellis Wyatt  Francisco d'Anconia  Gwen Ives  Hank Rearden  Hugh Akston  James Taggart The question "Who is John Galt?"
is asked repeatedly throughout Atlas Shrugged.
Late into the book we learn the John Galt is the man who stopped the motor of the world and the leader of the Strikers.
He is also the same character as Mystery Worker.

John Galt was the son of a garage mechanic in Ohio.
He left home at age 12 and began college at Patrick Henry University at age 16.
There he befriended Francisco d'Anconia and Ragnar Danneskjold, all three of whom double-majored in physics and philosophy.
They were the cherished students of Robert Stadler and Hugh Akston.

After graduating, Galt become an engineer at the Twentieth Century Motor Works where he designed a revolutionary new motor that had the potential to change the world.
When the owners of the company decided to run the factory by the maxim, 'By each according to his ability, to each according to his need', Galt perceived what was wrong with the world and what had to be done to stop it.
He put his mind on strike, and set about persuading the other men of the mind to go on strike as well.

Since everyone across the country is repeating the phrase, "Who is John Galt?
", it is natural that many people have attempted to answer that question.
Dagny Taggart hears a number of John Galt Legends before finding the real John Galt.
Lillian Rearden  Looters  Dick McNamara  Moochers  Mort Liddy  Mr. Mowen  Mystery Worker  Newsstand Owner  Orren Boyle  Owen Kellogg  Paul Larkin  Philip Rearden Ragnar Danneskjold is one of the original Strikers.
He is now world famous as a pirate.

Ragnar seizes relief ships that are being sent from the United States to Europe.
No one knows what he does with the goods he seizes.
As the novel progresses, Ragnar begins, for the first time, to become active in American waters, and is even spotted in Delaware Bay.

His name may be a pun on 'Dane's Gold', although "skjold" means shield, not gold.
Rearden's Mother  Richard Halley  Robert Stadler  Simon Pritchett The Strikers were people of the mind who go on strike because they do not appreciate being exploited by the Looters and demonized by a society who depends on them for its very existence.
The leader of the Strikers is John Galt.
Other Strikers include: Hugh Akston, Francisco d'Anconia, Ragnar Danneskjold, Richard Halley, and the Brakeman.

Francisco began working on the sly as a teenager in order to learn all he could about business.
While still a student at Patrick Henry University, he began working at a copper foundry, and investing in the stock market.
By the time he was twenty he had made enough to purchase the foundry.
He began working for d'Anconia Copper as assistant superintendent of a mine in Montana, but was quickly promoted to head of the New York office.
He took over d'Anconia Copper at age 23, after the death of his father.

According to Adam Reed ( Who is Francisco D'Anconia?
), d'Anconia is the only Hero-class character who is recognizably Jewish (not in the religious, but in the historical sense, like Ayn Rand herself).
Gwen Ives  Hank Rearden Hugh Akston is identified as "One of the last great advocates of reason."

Hugh Akston is mentioned in Section161.
James Taggart is the President of Taggart Transcontinental and a leader of the Looters.
Taggart is an expert influence peddler who is incapable of making decisions on his own.
He relies on his sister Dagny Taggart to actually run the railroad, but nonetheless opposes her in almost every endeavor.

As the novel progresses, the moral philosophy of the Looters is revealed: it is a code of nihilism.
The goal of this code is to not exist, to become a zero.
Taggart struggles to remain unaware that this is his goal.
He maintains his pretence that he wants to live, and becomes horrified whenever his mind starts to grasp the truth about himself.
This contradiction leads to the recurring absurdity of his life: the desire to destroy those on whom his life depends, and the horror that he will succeed at this.

Lillian is a Moocher who seeks to destroy her husband.
She compares being Rearden's wife with owning the world's most powerful horse.
Since she cannot comfortably ride a horse that goes too fast, she must bridle it down to her level, even if that means it will never reach its potential and its power will be wasted.

Lillian also serves to illustrate Rand's Theory of sex.
She believes sex is a base animal instinct and that sexual indulgence is a sign of moral weakness.
She is incapable of feeling this kind of desire, which she believes testifies to her moral superiority.
However, according to the theory of sex Lillian's lack of sexual capacity results from her inability to experience value in herself; she is therefore unable to respond sexually when she experiences value in others.

Lillian tolerates sex with her husband only because she is 'realistic' enough to know he is just a brute who requires satisfaction of his brute instincts.
In Section 161 she indicates that she abhors Francisco d'Anconia, because she believes he is a sexual adventurer.The Looters are a group of evil characters sometimes referred to as "James Taggart and his friends".
They are similar to the Moochers.
The Looters consist of men and women who use force to obtain value from those who produce it.
They seek to destroy the producers despite the fact that they are dependent upon them.

Newsstand Owner Orren Boyle is the head of Associated Steel and a friend of James Taggart.
He is one of the Looters.
He is an investor in the San Sebastian Mines.
Owen Kellogg Paul Larkin is an unsuccessful, middle-aged businessman, a friend of the Rearden family, and a member of the Looters.
In Section 121 Larkin visits Philadelphia to warn Hank Rearden of possible trouble from Washington.
In Section 131 he meets with the other Looters to work out a plan to bring Rearden down.
James Taggart knows he is friends with Hank Rearden and challenges his loyalty, and Larkin assures Taggart that he will go along with them.
Philip Rearden Ragnar Danneskjold is one of the original Strikers.

Rearden's Mother  Richard Halley  Robert Stadler Dr. Simon Pritchett is the prestigious head of the Department of Philosophy at Patrick Henry University and is considered the leading philosopher of the age.
He is also a Looter.
He is certainly representative of the philosophy of the age - he is a crude reductionist who believes man is nothing but a collection of chemicals; he believes there are no standards, that definitions are fluid, reason is a superstition, that it is futile to seek meaning in life, and that the duty of a philosopher is to show that nothing can be understood.
He explains all this in his book The Metaphysical Contradictions of the Universe, and at cocktail parties.The Strikers were people of the mind who go on strike because they do not appreciate being exploited by the Looters and demonized by a society who depends on them for its very existence.

Wesley Mouch is a member of the Looters and Hank Reardens man in Washington.
Initially Wesley Mouch is the least powerful and least significant of the Looters - the other members of this group feel they can look down upon him with impunity.
Eventually he becomes the most powerful Looter, and the country's economic dictator.

Peikoff told the readers that "Father Amadeus was Taggart's priest, to whom he confessed his sins.
The priest was supposed to be a positive character honestly devoted to the good but practicing consistently the morality of mercy.
Miss Rand dropped him, she told me, when she found that it was impossible to make such a character convincing."
The quotation from Rand's journals included a passage describing what John Galt represented to each main characters.
That included the following: "For Father Amadeus represents the source of the conflict.
The uneasy realisation that Galt is the end of his endeavors, the man of virtue, the perfect man - and that his means do not fit this end (and that he is destroying this, his ideal, for the sake of those who are evil)."

Interestingly, Rand succesfully did something similar in her very first book, "We The Living".
There, one of the main characters is a Communist, Andrei Taganov, who definitely can be described, in a paraphrase of the above, as "a positive character honestly devoted to the good but practicing consistently the ideology of Marxism".
In other words, a very idealistic and dedicated Communist, who is totally devoted to the Party and is willing to lay down his life for Communism, yet is a symapthetic (and convincing) major character in a book which is as anti-Communist as can be.
(Andrei is, moreover, the lover of the book's heroine Kira, which Rand explicitly described as representing herself in character though not in specific biographical details).

Peikoff also mentions that as originally conceived the book was going to have a character named Stacy Rearden, a sister of Hank Rearden.
Not much is told of what her role was supposed to be and why she was eventually dropped.
Apparently, she was going to be another parasite like Rearden's brother, mother and wife; presumably, Rand came to the conclusion that three such charcters around Rearden sufficiantly fulfilled her literary and philosophical purposes.

Ferris is a biologist who works as "co-ordinator" at the State Science Institute.
He uses his position there to deride reason and productive achievement.
The Institute publishes his book, Why Do You Think You Think?, in which he calls reason "an irrational idea" that is "incapable of dealing with the nature of the universe."
He clashes on several occasions with Hank Rearden.
When Rearden Metal is first produced, Ferris has the Institute put out a statement raising doubts about it.
He twice attempts to blackmail Rearden.
The first attempt, which fails, is to get him to sell Rearden Metal to the Institute for use on Project X.
The second attempt, which succeeds, is to get Rearden to sign the rights to Rearden Metal over to the government.
He is also one of the group of looters who tries to get Rearden to agree to the Steel Unification Plan.

Ferris hosts the demonstration of the Project X weapon, and gets Dr. Robert Stadler to publicly endorse it.
When John Galt is captured by the looters, Ferris tries to convince him to help them by suggesting that one-third of children and the elderly will be executed if Galt refuses.
Later he uses a device called the "Ferris Persuader" to torture Galt.