By Ubirathan Miranda.
Theologian.
Life Christian Univesrity

What do liberalism, atheism, communism, socialism; humanism, evolutionism, and Satanism have in common?
Could all of these distinct beliefs and ideologies actually be related?
Is there a common thread linking these systems of thought?
Yes.
Not only is there a link, but all of these belief systems are linked not only in essence, but also in an agenda.
That agenda has been carefully and cleverly concealed from the human race by dark spiritual powers bent on the destruction and damnation of every human soul on this planet.
It is a dark and dangerous agenda that is now in full bloom, not only in America, but all around the globe.
All societies, regardless of race, religion, or nationality have been impacted by this insidious agenda from the very pit of hell.
Its ultimate end is the destruction and eternal separation of the human race from the very loving God who created it.
But while progressing towards its ultimate goal, this agenda continues to bring death, destruction and pain in all societies.
The precepts of this agenda touch all members of the human race, regardless of ethnicity, social standing, economics or education.
Unless recognized, this agenda will continue to reap victims along the way and leave pain, destruction, and mayhem along the way.

The doctrine of the self is so inherently dangerous in its implications and so destructive to the human race that at the end of the ages only the intervention of God Himself will bring an end to it.
To understand the doctrine itself, it’s important to understand the genesis of this doctrine.
To be self-aware, to be sentient, and to have the ability for consciousness and free-will is one of God’s greatest gifts to His creation, be it angelic or human.
That ability should only causes us to be further closer to the Creator.
It’s not a dependency based on fear or the mandate from the Monarch of the Universe.
This is a dependence and adoration based on love and gratefulness to God.
It is indeed a wonderful mutually-satisfying relationship with the Almighty.
In it, humanity finds its ultimate fulfillment as unique individuals, beloved by the Creator.
In it, the Lord enjoys fellowship and camaraderie with His creation, for all of God’s creation, only humanity has in its soul God’s very image.
At the onset of the creation, the fulfillment of the self, be it angelic or human, was based solely on the individual’s relationship with God.
In God’s created order, the fulfillment of the self without regards to godly norms, conventions and boundaries was an aberration, an anomaly closely linked with sinful and willful rebellion.
This selfish fulfillment of the self was contrary to natural and spiritual norms and consequently, deadly both physically and spiritually.

Lucifer, in his quest to fulfill the self, became the originator of the concept and process of adulation, adoration and the fulfillment of the self regardless of cost to the individual and society.
Lucifer in a sense became the first cause in regards to the pursuit and ultimate establishment of the doctrine of the self.
The fallen cherub became the foundation stone on which the further manifestations of the worship of the self would be played upon the stage of the human experience.
And how painful that experience would be as the worship of the self would be the foundational bedrock on which rebellious individuals would base their lust for the self and self aggrandizement.
Throughout the centuries, these manifestations of the self would take different philosophical and ideological shape and forms and leave their destructive marks in the human experience.

4 that you will take up this proverb against the king of Babylon, and say: "How the oppressor has ceased, The golden city ceased!
5 The Lord has broken the staff of the wicked, The scepter of the rulers; 6 He who struck the people in wrath with a continual stroke, He who ruled the nations in anger, Is persecuted and no one hinders.
7 The whole earth is at rest and quiet; They break forth into singing.
8 Indeed the cypress trees rejoice over you, And the cedars of Lebanon, Saying, 'Since you were cut down, No woodsman has come up against us.'
9 "Hell from beneath is excited about you, To meet you at your coming; It stirs up the dead for you, All the chief ones of the earth; It has raised up from their thrones All the kings of the nations.
10 They all shall speak and say to you: 'Have you also become as weak as we?
Have you become like us?
11 Your pomp is brought down to Sheol, And the sound of your stringed instruments; The maggot is spread under you, And worms cover you.'
12 "How you are fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning!
How you are cut down to the ground, You who weakened the nations!
13 For you have said in your heart: 'I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God; I will also sit on the mount of the congregation On the farthest sides of the north; 14 I will ascend above the heights of the clouds, I will be like the Most High.'
15 Yet you shall be brought down to Sheol, To the lowest depths of the Pit.
16 "Those who see you will gaze at you, And consider you, saying: 'Is this the man who made the earth tremble, Who shook kingdoms, 17 Who made the world as a wilderness And destroyed its cities, Who did not open the house of his prisoners?'
18 "All the kings of the nations, All of them, sleep in glory, Everyone in his own house; 19 But you are cast out of your grave Like an abominable branch, Like the garment of those who are slain, Thrust through with a sword, Who go down to the stones of the pit, Like a corpse trodden underfoot.
20 You will not be joined with them in burial, Because you have destroyed your land And slain your people.
The brood of evildoers shall never be named.
21 Prepare slaughter for his children Because of the iniquity of their fathers, Lest they rise up and possess the land, And fill the face of the world with cities."
22 "For I will rise up against them," says the Lord of hosts, "And cut off from Babylon the name and remnant, And offspring and posterity," says the Lord.

When asked if Satanists worship the Devil, Anton LaVey, the founder of the Church of Satan in America, answered that in reality Satan is only an example for Satanist to follow.
That in reality, a Satanist worships only the self.
This is of course in line with Luciferian philosophy and practice.
At its core, Satanism is only the worship of the self regardless of cost or consequence to anyone else or society in general.
The fulfillment of one’s desires is the very foundation of Satanism.
Lucifer and his rebellion against God is only used as an example of how to accomplish that basic foundational belief and apply the Satanic philosophic concept in the life of the individual.

It can be said that humanism is a philosophy of good intentions but devoid of any real life or godly principles.
Sophocles, the brilliant ancient playwright summed up the very essence of humanism when he stated that man is the measure of all things.
Humanistic philosophy places in kind the ultimate solution for all the woes that assails humanity without the need for Divine intervention.
Humanism in a sense elevates mankind to the level of deity and delegates humanity the role of the gods of the age, completely able to conquer any challenge that is placed in its path.
This of course has been proven wrong due to the inability of humanity to tame or control its fallen nature and tendency to lean towards evil.
If anything, the wars, genocides, and plagues of the twentieth century deal the philosophy of humanism a deadly blow.
However, humanism continues to plague humanity with its empty braggadocio and promises of a better and enlightened future while neglecting the main fallacy of the philosophy: the enshrinement of the self, the worship of the human nature and the rejection of the Divine.
Again, at its essence, humanism is simply Satanism posed as a spiritually-neutral and entirely human philosophy and practice of the exaltation of the self.

In its rejection of any form of religion or belief in God, atheism proves to be another satanic philosophy in that atheism exalts the self.
It embraces humanism philosophically while at its core lies the very elevation of the self.
It could be said that atheism is a religious expression of humanism.
While denying God’s very existence, atheists do elevate the self, the ego, the human nature, condition and experience.
The self if placed on the altar of the spirit and humanism is used as a means to placate the voice of conscience.
The atheist’s belief is in the very nature of humanism and the abilities of the self rather than the existence of the Divine and the human dependence on God.

Charles Darwin’s theory of evolution has become one of the cornerstone beliefs of modern-day scientists.
Not only has the theory of evolution revolutionized the scientific field, but it has impacted other academic and social fields as well.
The Nazis used Darwin’s theory to justify their demented pseudo-science obsession with race and was a foundational element to justify the Holocaust.
At its core, evolution is truly about the struggle of the self against one’s hostile environment.
The survival of the fittest translates into the law of the jungle, and by application, the theory lends itself to all sorts of applications in several concepts, but the overall theme is the focus on the lack of any Divine intervention and the complete trust in the inner and supposed random works of nature.
The strength of the self is celebrated, the focus mainly on the continuous evolutionary nature of man and nature.
Evolution not only negates Divine intervention and creation by Divine fiat, but strips mankind of the very image of God.
It’s a direct rejection of the Divine and once again the exaltation of the self.
The very fact that evolution has been disproved as a viable theory is to no effect to the scientific and academia community.
Not a single shred of fossil evidence exists to link present humanity with the hominids of the past and yet, most scientists still persist in their stubborn embrace of this failed theory.
To deny the theory of evolution would mean a complete acceptance of God’s existence and His direct act of creation.
And if God is embraced, the self is no longer the main drive and focus of the system.
To profess creation by Divine fiat would deal a death blow to many of the extension of the theory of evolution in many of our current philosophical theories and concepts and ultimately, its practices.
Thus, the survival of the theory of evolution in the face of so many concrete contradictory evidence as to its veracity proves that the theory should really be known as the survival of the stubborn self.

Communism and socialism is simply a political extension of the doctrine of the self.
It could really be argued that socialism and communism are in essence the same political theory.
Socialism is simply a blander version of communism with capitalist and democratic elements thrown in the mix.
The insidiousness of communism is the fact that the state attempts to supplant God in matters of faith and spiritual needs.
The state becomes the great provider of not only material and social goods, but also the provider of the intrinsic needs of human being.
In one hand the state denies the very existence of God and on the other, the state attempts to become God.
In communism, the state absorbs the self and by extension, the self becomes the state and takes on the characteristics of the state.
The supremacy of the state is in a fact a simple exaltation of the self.
When communism speaks of the collective will of the people, it is simply stating the will of the self as transformed by the will of the state.
Without the Luciferian basis of the foundational doctrine of the self, the, the philosophy of humanism, and the pseudo-science theory of evolution, communism cannot exist.
Once again, the self, albeit translated into the collective will and essence of the state, is the main focus and modus operandi of communism.

Liberalism is a political and social philosophy based entirely on the worship and fulfilling of the self.
Liberalism is a very egocentric philosophy despite the deception posed by liberals concerning their pseudo-compassion for the masses.
Most liberals are deep believers in alternate systems of religious belief which centers mostly on the rejection of the Judeo-Christian articles of faith and values and world-view.
By far, most alternate religious systems are based solely or partly on the fulfillment of the self regardless of consequence to the self or one’s community.
Liberalism is simply an extension of Luciferian philosophy, humanism, evolutionism, socialism and communism.
It is a system of beliefs that encompasses the enshrinement of the self to the exclusion of others.
Liberals are wont to call themselves compassionate people.
That is true when it comes to the adoption and absorption of their beliefs by the blind masses.
But their level of intolerance is most evident when faced with opposition.
Liberals simply do not understand that the core of their liberal beliefs is Luciferian and based on the enshrinement of the self.
Liberalism is simply another politically correct way of self-gratification and aggrandizement.
Liberalism is a most evil and insidious philosophy.
It could be simply argued that liberals embrace liberalism with religious fervor and zeal simply because without liberalism their world-view and compilation of selfish beliefs crumble to the ground never again to see the light of day.

As shown throughout history, the links between the various philosophies has been exposed down to their very genesis –Luciferian philosophy.
No one with a clear mind can simply dismiss this possibility without further inquiry and soul searching.
Are all adherents to these philosophies evil?
Some are and history is proof that some leaders have utilized these philosophies in one way or another to wage war, commit atrocities, rob, and bring genocide to whole races of people.
Most who embrace the aforementioned philosophies are simply blinded to the true nature of their dearly-held philosophies.
They have been deceived by a sinister spiritual agenda with great influence over many of the world’s institutions.
There are among the deceived masses good people, great philanthropists, and individuals who truly desire to make the world a better place.
It could truly be stated that the road to perdition is paved with good intentions and the sad reality is that many a good people end up in hell.
What are we as Christians to do concerning this truly sad reality?
Should we like gorillas pound our righteous chests and leave the deceived masses on their path to spiritual deception?
No.
We must put aside religious dogma and take on the nature of Christ and by doing so; He will shine through our humanity.
We must show the deceived that we too struggle with the issues of life.
We suffer losses; are assailed by sickness; struggle with living out our faith at times; suffer temptation; give in to sin often; and are partakers of the shroud of humanity.
But at no time should we adopt the stated philosophies and practices simply to prove a point.
Because while sharing the temporal fallen human nature, we have been redeemed by the Savior and been made clean by His atoning sacrifice and shed blood at the cross of Calvary; and our living should at least reflect that reality.