In the very beginning of the story, all the animals are called to the barn.
They are called because Old Major, a rather elderly and much respected pig, had a strange dream to which he wanted to communicate to them.
When they gather, Old Major tells them that he dreamed that all animals would revolt against their oppressive human masters and would be free.
He tells they should start planning for this revolution, though it probably won’t be in there life time.
But the animals get their chance sooner then they expect.
One day Mr. Jones, the owner of the farm, comes home drunk an forgets to feed the animals.
After a while one of the cows gets so hungry that she smashes her way to the food.
All the other animals join her.
Mr. Jones comes to see what is happening.
The animals attack him a chase him out of the farm.
When they realize what they have done, all the animals rejoice and burn all the knives, whips and other cruel tools.
The next day the pigs, Snowball and Napoleon, organize everyone in the barn (pigs were naturally left as the leaders as they are the smartest.)
They tell everyone that they have boiled down the ideas of “Animalism” to seven commandments.
They are:The pigs had taught themselves to read from an old spelling book left over from Mrs. Jones’ children.
The animals then started the harvest.
Snowball was very active, making clubs and committees, and holding debates and meetings.
Napoleon on the other hand did little, he took some dog puppies to educate but that was it.
One day, Mr. Jones and his men tried to retake the farm, but the animals, especially Boxer and Snowball fought bravely.
Many weeks after, Snowball had an idea of making a windmill to generate electricity.
Napoleon argued against the idea in a debate but Snowball won support of the animals.
Then, suddenly, Napoleon called on the puppies he was educating, now full grown dogs.
The dogs attacked Snowball and chased him out of the farm, a coup.
Then Napoleon told the crowd that he had found out that snowball was a spy from the neighbouring farms.
Napoleon cancelled all meetings, committees, debates and all other democratic activities.
The dictatorship of Napoleon had begun.
Napoleon ordered the windmill to be started.
Once it was a fourth done, a heavy wind blew it over.
The fall of the windmill was blamed on Snowball.
From then on, when anything ever bad happened it was blamed on Snowball.
They started to rebuild the windmill.
But when it was almost done, a band of men from neighbouring farms came and blew it up with some TNT.
Once again the windmill was started.
Over the course of all this building, the pigs slowly started to humanize themselves.
For instance; they drank alcohol and liked it, and when they did they changed the fifth commandment to “No animal shall drink alcohol to excess.” They kept changing the commandments and when someone remembered the old ones they said that their memory wasn’t good.
They finally finished the windmill.
And in the end, the pigs invited all the farmers in the area.
They put on coats and started walking on their hind legs.
They got whips and started whipping the animals.
They slept in the house.