Amphibian skin is permeable to water and contains many mucous glands which keep the skin from drying out.
To compensate for their thin and delicate skin, all amphibians have evolved poison glands as a defense mechanism, although toxicity varies by species.
Some amphibian toxins can be lethal to humans while others have no effect at all.
The integumentary structure contains some typical characteristics common to terrestrial vertebrates, such as the presence of highly cornified outer layers, renewed periodically through a molting process controlled by the pituitary and thyroid glands.
Local thickenings (often called warts) are common, such as those found on toads.

The skin color of amphibians is produced by three layers of pigment cells called chromatophores.
These three cell layers correspond to the melanophores (occupying the deepest layer), the guanophores (forming an intermediate layer and containing many granules, producing a blue-green color) and lipophores (yellow, the most superficial layer).
The color change experienced by many species is caused by secretions from the pituitary gland.
Unlike bony fish, there is no direct control by the nervous system of the pigment cells.
Therefore, the color change is slower.
Amphibians are predominantly green.
Bright colors usually indicate that the species produces an exceptionally toxic poison.

Amphibians swallow their prey whole, with some chewing done in the oral cavities of some species, so they possess voluminous stomachs.
Sphincters separate the esophagus from both the oral cavity and the stomach.
The relatively short esophagus is lined with cilia that help transport food and secretions into the stomach.
Mucous and pepsin, a digestive enzyme, are secreted by glands lining the esophagus.
The stomach is separated from the intestine by a pyloric sphincter.
The duodenum controls the transport of food into the intestine from the stomach.

Amphibians possess a pancreas, liver and gall bladder.
Like mammals, the liver functions as the central metabolic organ that regulates blood sugar, and also produces the final metabolic products and transports them through the vascular system to the kidneys, and finally to excretion.
The liver in most amphibians is large with two lobes.
The size of the liver is determined by its vital function as a glycogen and fat storage unit, and may change proportionally with the seasons with increasing or decreasing activity.
In aquatic amphibians, the liver plays only a small role in processing nitrogen for excretion, and ammonia is diffused mainly through the skin and excretion.
The liver of terrestrial amphibians converts ammonia to urea, a less toxic, water soluble nitrogenous compound, as a means of water conservation.
In some species, urea is further converted into uric acid.
The liver secretions from the liver collect in the gall bladder, and flow into the small intestine.
Salamanders lack a valve separating the small intestine from the large intestine.
In the small intestine, enzymes digest carbohydrates, fats, and proteins.
Salt and water absorption occur in the large intestine, as well as mucous secretion to aid in the transport of fecal matter, which is excreted through the cloaca.
Amphibians have two kidneys located dorsally, near the roof of the body cavity, and in pairs.
Their jobs are to filter the blood of waste and transport it to the gall bladder.

When the animals enter the water again for reproduction changes are driven by prolactin, when they return to the land phase by thyroxin Most amphibians go through metamorphosis, a process of significant morphological change after birth.
In typical amphibian development, eggs are laid in water and larvae are adapted to an aquatic lifestyle.
Frogs, toads, and newts all hatch from the egg as larvae with external gills.
Afterwards, newt larvae start a predatory lifestyle, while tadpoles mostly scrape food off surfaces with their horny tooth ridges.

Metamorphosis in amphibians is regulated by thyroxin concentration in the blood, which stimulates metamorphosis, and prolactin, which counteracts its effect.
Specific events are dependent on threshold values for different tissues.
Because most embryonic development is outside the parental body, development is subject to many adaptations due to specific ecological circumstances.
For this reason tadpoles can have horny ridges for teeth, whiskers, and fins.
They also make use of the lateral line organ.
After metamorphosis, these organs become redundant and will be resorbed by controlled cell death, called apoptosis.
The amount of adaptation to specific ecological circumstances is remarkable, with many discoveries still being made.
With frogs and toads, the external gills of the newly hatched tadpole are covered with a gill sac after a few days, and lungs are quickly formed.
Front legs are formed under the gill sac, and hindlegs are visible a few days later.
Following that there is usually a longer stage during which the tadpole lives off a vegetarian diet.
Tadpoles use a relatively long, spiral‐shaped gut to digest that diet.

Rapid changes in the body can then be observed as the lifestyle of the frog changes completely.
The spiral‐shaped mouth with horny tooth ridges is resorbed together with the spiral gut.
The animal develops a big jaw, and its gills disappear along with its gill sac.
Eyes and legs grow quickly, a tongue is formed, and all this is accompanied by associated changes in the neural networks (development of stereoscopic vision, loss of the lateral line system, etc.) All this can happen in about a day, so it is truly a metamorphosis.
It isn't until a few days later that the tail is reabsorbed, due to the higher thyroxin concentrations required for tail resorption.
In newts, there is no true metamorphosis because newt larvae already feed as predators and continue doing so as adults.
Newts' gills are never covered by a gill sac and will be resorbed only just before the animal leaves the water.
Just as in tadpoles, their lungs are functional early, but newts don't make as much use of them as tadpoles do.
Newts often have an aquatic phase in spring and summer, and a land phase in winter.
For adaptation to a water phase, prolactin is the required hormone, and for adaptation to the land phase, thyroxin.
External gills do not return in subsequent aquatic phases because these are completely absorbed upon leaving the water for the first time.

The amphibians are a class of vertebrate animals with four limbs.
They are non-amniotes which means that their eggs are not surrounded by the several membranes, some impervious, which enable mammals, reptiles and birds to reproduce on land.
Amphibians typically reproduce in fresh water and are not found in the sea, with the exception of one or two frogs that live in brackish water in mangrove swamps.
Most amphibians lay eggs that have a gelatinous coating which swells when it comes in contact with water.
The larvae that hatch from the eggs are mostly quite dissimilar to the adult form.
In the case of frogs and toads they have a large head and a dorsally flattened tail and are known as tadpoles.
They are vegetarians and breathe with gills They have no limbs at first, the back limbs thrusting through then skin at a later stage, followed by the fore limbs after which the tail is reabsorbed.
After this metamorphosis the juveniles look like miniature versions of the adult.
Newt and salamander larvae have long bodies and feathery gills.
They are carnivorous and the front legs develop before the back ones.
They do not undergo metamorphosis in the same way that frogs and toads do.
The caecilians either produce live young or lay eggs in damp positions in their burrows.

Amphibians are cold blooded animals and unable to maintain their body temperature above that of their surroundings.
This means that they are only able to be active when the temperature is high enough.
There is great variability in the sensitivity of different species to cold.
Many species hibernate in winter, going into a state of torpor either in an underground chamber or underwater.
In colder climates, they may be in a state of hibernation for more than half the year.
In hot weather they may aestivate underground, sometimes buried in the mud of a dried up pond, reviving when cooler weather and rain restores their habitat.
An advantage of being cold blooded is that little energy is required to provide body heat.
This means that they can go without food for prolonged periods without coming to harm.
The order Anura includes the frogs and toads.
Members of this order with smooth skins are commonly referred to as frogs while those with warted skins are known as toads.
There are no taxonomic differences between these two groups but members of the family Bufonidae are known as true toads.
Frogs and toads have broad heads, no necks and plump bodies with short, stout fore limbs and long hind limbs that fold underneath them.
Although many species are associated with water and damp habitats, some are specialised to live in trees and in deserts.
They are found worldwide.
The order Caudata includes the salamanders and the family Salamandridae includes the true salamanders and the newts.
Salamanders and newts have pointed heads, long cylindrical bodies, four similar sized short legs and long tails.
They may be terrestrial or aquatic but many spend part of the year in each habitat.
They mostly spend the day hidden under stones or logs or in dense vegetation, emerging in the evening and night to forage for worms, insects and other invertebrates.
They are found in the Holarctic region of the northern hemisphere and in Central and South America north of the Amazon Basin.
The order Gymnophiona includes the caecilians.
These are limbless animals that resemble snakes or worms.
Their skin has circular folds which enhances their similarity to segmented worms.
Some are aquatic but most live underground and adopt a burrowing lifestyle.
Many caecilians give birth to live young, and in the animals that do not do this, the eggs may undergo metamorphosis before they hatch.
Caecilians are found in tropical Africa, Asia and Central and South America.

Amphibians have soft bodies and are relatively helpless.
They are eaten by birds and mammals when on land and by fish when in the water.
Many are nocturnal and hide during the day, thereby avoiding predators that hunt by sight, apart from owls which are also nocturnal.
Other amphibians use camouflage to avoid being detected.
They have various colorings such as mottled browns, greys and olives to make themselves inconspicuous so that they blend into the background.
Other species contain poison glands and use bright colours to warn potential predators of their toxicity.
These are mostly black and yellow or black and red, like the fire salamander (Salamandra salamandra).
Once a predator has tried eating one of these, it is likely to remember the coloration next time it encounters one.
In some species, such as the fire-bellied toad (Bombina spp.
), the warning coloration is on the belly and these animals adopt a defensive pose when attacked to exhibit the bright colors to the attacker.
A few salamanders will autotomise their tails when attacked, sacrificing this part of their body to enable the main part to escape.
The tail is regenerated later.
Some frogs and toads inflate themselves to make themselves look large and fierce, and some spadefoot toads (Pelobates spp) scream and leap towards the attacker.

The noises made by newts, salamanders and caecilians are limited to occasional soft squeaks, grunts or hisses.
Frogs and toads however use their voice in the breeding season to attract mates.
Each call is characteristic of the species, the presence of which in an area may be easier to detect by its voice than by a fleeting glimpse of the animal itself.
In ponds where more than one species breed, it is important for the female to be attracted to the correct partner as male frogs, in their ardour, have been known to attempt to mate with other males, females of the wrong species or inanimate objects.
Besides the attracting call, another vocalisation is a release call, used by a frog suffering in this way from advances by the wrong frog.
Calling bears the risk of attracting predators.
Some males do not call at all but station themselves near others that are calling, with the intention of intercepting a female attracted to the sound.
Although calling mainly occurs in the breeding season, sporadic calls may be heard at other times of year in some species.

The calls are made by vibrations of the larynx but are often amplified by vocal sacs which act as resonators.
Sometimes these are fairly small air-filled pouches inside the mouth but in other species they are much larger and cause a ballooning of the elastic skin of the throat and are known as external vocal sacs.
Many species have single sacs but members of the family Ranidae have two, one on each side of the mouth.

Their lungs became more efficient and their limbs stronger.
The hyomandibula bone in the hyoid region of the fish behind the gills diminished in size and became the stapes of the ear, an adaptation necessary for hearing on dry land.
An affinity between the amphibians and the teleost fish is the labyrinthic structure of the teeth and the paired supra-occipital bones at the back of the head, both features not found elsewhere in the animal kingdom.

In the late Devonian and early Carboniferous, the seas, rivers and lakes were teeming with life but the land was the realm of early plants and devoid of animal life.
In the early Carboniferous () the climate became wet and warm and extensive swamps developed with mosses, ferns, horsetails and calamites.
Air breathing arthropods began to evolve and invaded the land where they provided food for the carnivorous amphibians that began to emerge from the waters.
There were no other tetrapods on the land and the amphibians were at the top of the food chain and occupying the ecological position currently held by the crocodile.
Though equipped with limbs and the ability to breathe air, most still had a long tapering body and strong tail.
They were the top land predators, sometimes reaching several meters in length, preying on the large insects on land and many types of fish in the water.
They still needed to return to water to lay their shell-less eggs and even modern amphibia have a fully aquatic larval stage with gills like their ancestral fish.
It was the development of the amniotic egg, which prevented the developing embryo from drying out, that enabled the reptiles to reproduce on land and which led to their dominance in the period that followed.

During the Triassic Period, the better-adapted reptiles began to compete with amphibians, leading to a reduction in their size and importance in the biosphere.
Lissamphibia, which includes all modern amphibians and is the only surviving lineage of amphibians left, may have branched off from the extinct groups Temnospondyli or Lepospondyli at some time between the Late Carboniferous and the Early Triassic according to the fossil record.
The relative scarcity of fossil evidence prevents an exact date being known but the most recent molecular clock study based on multi-locus data suggest a Late Carboniferous – Early Permian origin of extant amphibians.

In most amphibians, there are four digits on the fore foot and five on the hind foot, but no claws on either.
Some salamanders have fewer digits and the Amphiumas are eel-like in appearance with tiny stubby legs.
The sirens are aquatic salamanders with stumpy forelimbs and no hind limbs.
The caecilians are limbless.
They burrow in the manner of earthworms with zones of muscle contractions moving along the body.
On the surface of the ground or in water they move by undulating their body from side to side.

In frogs, the hind legs are larger than the fore legs, especially so in those species that principally move by jumping or swimming.
In the walkers and runners the hind limbs are not so large and the burrowers mostly have short limbs and broad bodies.
The feet have adaptations for the way of life with webbing between the toes for swimming, broad adhesive toe pads for climbing and keratinised tubercles on the hind feet for digging (frogs usually dig backwards into the soil).
In most salamanders, the limbs are short and more or less the same length and project at right angles from the body.
Locomotion on land is by crawling and the tail often swings from side to side or is used as a prop, particularly when climbing.
In aquatic salamanders, and in tadpoles, the tail has dorsal and ventral fins and is moved from side to side for propulsion.
Frogs do not have tails and caecilians have very short ones.

Salamanders use their tails in defence.
Some species in the Plethodontidae have a weak zone at the base of the tail and if the salamander is in danger or if the tail is grabbed by a predator, it breaks off, a process known as autotomy.
Other salamanders are also prepared to drop their tail to save their lives.
The tail may continue to twitch after separation which may distract the attacker and both tails and limbs are able to be regenerated.
Adult frogs are unable to regrow parts but tadpoles can do so.

The sirens (Siren spp.)
often ingest aquatic plant material with the invertebrates on which they feed and a Brazilian tree frog Xenohyla truncata includes a large quantity of fruit in its diet.
The Mexican burrowing toad (Rhinophrynus dorsalis) has a specially adapted tongue for picking up ants and termites.
It projects it with the tip foremost whereas other frogs flick out the rear part first, their tongues being hinged at the front.

Food is mostly selected by sight, even in conditions of dim light.
Movement of the prey triggers a feeding response.
Frogs have been caught on fish hooks baited with red flannel and green frogs (Rana clamitans) have been found to have stomachs full of elm seeds that they had seen floating past.
Toads, salamanders and caecilians also use smell to detect prey.
This response is mostly secondary because salamanders have been observed to remain stationary near odoriferous prey but only feed if it moves.
Cave dwelling amphibians normally hunt by smell and some salamanders seem to have learned to recognize immobile prey even when it has no smell.

They typically have small hinged pediceled teeth.
These have bicuspid conical crowns attached by a pedicel to the jaw and are replaced at intervals.
Salamanders, caecilians and some frogs have one or two rows of teeth in both jaws but some frogs (Rana spp.)
lack teeth in the lower jaw and toads (Bufo spp.)
have no teeth.
In many amphibians there are also vomerine teeth attached to a facial bone in the roof of the mouth.

The calls made by caecilians and salamanders are limited to occasional soft squeaks, grunts or hisses and have not been much studied.
A clicking sound sometimes produced by caecilians may be a means of orientation, as in bats, or a form of communication.
Most salamanders are considered voiceless but the California giant salamander (Dicamptodon ensatus) has vocal cords and can produce a rattling or barking sound.
Some species of salamander emit a quiet squeak or yelp if attacked.

In most species, the sound is produced by expelling air from the lungs over the vocal cords into an air sac or sacs in the throat or at the corner of the mouth.
This may distend like a balloon and acts as a resonator, helping to transfer the sound to the atmosphere, or the water at times when the animal is submerged.
The main vocalisation is the male's loud advertisement call which seeks to both encourage a female to approach and discourage other males from intruding on its territory.
This call is modified to a quieter courtship call on the approach of a female or to a more aggressive version if a male intruder draws near.
Calling bears the risk of attracting predators and involves the expendirure of much energy.
Other calls include those given by a female in response to the advertisement call and a release call given by a male or female during unwanted attempts at amplexus.
When a frog is attacked, a distress or fright call is emitted, often resembling a scream.
The usually nocturnal Cuban tree frog (Osteopilus septentrionalis) produces a rain call when there is rainfall during daylight hours.

In temperate regions, breeding is mostly seasonal, usually in the spring, and is triggered by increasing day length, rising temperatures or rainfall.
Experiments have shown the importance of temperature but the trigger event, especially in arid regions, is often rainfall.
In anurans, males usually arrive at the breeding sites before females and the vocal chorus they produce may stimulate the endocrine activity of males that are not yet reproductively active and ovulation in females.

In caecilians, fertilisation is internal, the male extruding an intromittent organ, the phallodeum, and inserting it into the female cloaca.
The paired Müllerian glands inside the male cloaca secrete a fluid which resembles that produced by mammalian prostate glands and which may transport and nourish the sperm.
Fertilisation probably takes place in the oviduct.

The majority of salamanders also practice internal fertilisation.
In most of these, the male deposits a spermatophore, a small packet of sperm on top of a gelatinous cone, on the substrate either on land or in the water.
The female takes the sperm packet into her vent by grasping it with the lips of the cloaca.
The spermatozoa move to the spermotheca in the roof of the cloaca where they remain until ovulation which may be many months later.
Courtship rituals and methods of transfer of the spermatophore vary between species.
Certain primitive salamanders in the families Hynobiidae, Sirenidae and Cryptobranchidae practice external fertilisation in a similar manner to frogs, with the female laying the eggs in water and the male releasing sperm onto the egg mass.

With a few exceptions, frogs use external fertilisation.
The male grasps the female tightly with his forelimbs either behind her arms or in front of her back legs, or in the case of Epipedobates tricolor, round her neck.
They remain in amplexus with their cloacae positioned close together while she lays her eggs and he covers them with his sperm.
Roughened nuptial pads on his hands help him retain his grip.
Often the male collects and retains the egg mass, forming his hind feet into a sort of basket.
An exception is the granular poison frog (Oophaga granulifera) where the male and female place their cloacae in close proximity while facing in opposite directions and then release eggs and sperm simultaneously.
The tailed frog (Ascaphus truei) exhibits internal fertilisation.
The "tail" is only possessed by the male and is an extension of the cloaca and used to inseminate the female.
This frog lives in fast flowing streams and internal fertilisation will prevent the sperm being washed away before fertilisation occurs.

Most frogs can be classified as either prolonged or explosive breeders.
Typically, prolonged breeders congregate at a breeding site, the males usually arriving first, calling and setting up territories.
Other satellite males remain quietly nearby, waiting for their opportunity to take over a territory.
The females arrive sporadically, mate selection takes place and eggs are laid.
The females depart and territories may change hands and more females appear and in due course, the breeding season comes to an end.
Explosive breeders on the other hand are found where temporary pools appear in dry regions after rainfall.
These frogs are typically fossorial species that emerge after heavy rains and congregate at a breeding site.
They are attracted there by the calling of the first male to find a suitable place, perhaps a pool that forms in the same place each rainy season.
The assembled frogs may call in unison and frenzied activity ensues, the males scrambling to mate with the usually smaller number of females.

The suborder Cryptobranchoidea contains the primitive salamanders.
A number of fossil cryptobranchoids have been found but there are only three living species, the Chinese giant salamander (Andrias davidianus), the Japanese giant salamander (Andrias japonicus ) and the hellbender (Cryptobranchus alleganiensis) from North America.
These large amphibians retain several larval characteristics in their adult state; gills slits are present and the eyes are unlidded.

The suborder Salamandroidea contains the advanced salamanders.
They differ from the cryptobranchoids by having the prearticular bones in their lower jaw fused and reproduction is by internal fertilisation.
The largest family in this group is Plethodontidae, the lungless salamanders, which includes sixty percent of all salamander species.
The family Salamandridae includes the true salamanders and the name "newt" is given to members of its subfamily Pleurodelinae.

The third suborder contains the sirens Sirenoidea consisting of four species in a single family, Sirenidae.
They are eel-like aquatic salamanders with much reduced forelimbs and no hind limbs.
Some of their features are primitive while others are derived.

Little is known of the territorial behaviour of caecilians but some frogs and salamanders defend home ranges.
These are usually feeding, breeding or sheltering sites and it is the males that normally exhibit such behaviour though in some species, females and even juveniles are also involved.
Although in many frog species, females are larger than males, this is not the case in most species where males are actively involved in territorial defence.
Some of these have specific adaptations such as enlarged teeth for biting or spines on the chest, arms or thumbs.

In salamanders, defence of a territory involves adopting an aggressive posture and if necessary attacking the intruder.
This may involve snapping, chasing and sometimes biting, occasionally causing the loss of a tail.
The behaviour of red-backed salamanders (Plethodon cinereus) has been much studied.
It was found that 91% of marked individuals which were later recaptured were within a metre (yard) of their original location (foraging behaviour would have given a different result at night).
The salamanders left odour marks which deterred the intrusion of others and delineated the boundaries of their territory.
A lot of the behaviour seemed stereotyped and did not involve any actual contact between individuals.
An aggressive posture involved raising the body off the ground and glaring at the opponent who often turned away submissively.
If the intruder persisted, a biting lunge was usually launched at either the tail region or the naso-labial grooves.
Damage to either of these areas can reduce the fitness of the rival, either because of the need to regenerate tissue or because it impairs their ability to detect food.

In frogs, male territorial behaviour is often observed at breeding locations and calling is both an announcement of ownership of part of this resource and an advertisement call to potential mates.
In general, a deeper voice represents a heavier and more powerful individual, and this may be sufficient to prevent intrusion by smaller males.
Much energy is used in the vocalization and it takes a toll on the territory holder who may be displaced by a fitter individual if he loses too much condition.
There is a tendency for males to tolerate the holders of neighbouring territories while vigorously attacking unknown intruders.
Holders of territories have a “home” advantage and usually come off better in an encounter between two similar sized frogs.
If threats are insufficient, chest to chest tussles may take place.
Other fighting methods include pushing and shoving, deflating the opponent’s vocal sac, jumping on his back, biting, chasing, splashing and ducking him and seizing him by the head.