The cost of goods in Alaska has long been higher than in the contiguous 48 states.
This has changed for the most part in Anchorage, where the cost of living is actually less than some major cities in the Lower 48, thanks to lower housing and transportation costs.
However, rural Alaska suffers from extremely high prices for food and consumer goods due to the lack of transportation infrastructure.
Many rural residents come in to Anchorage and purchase food and goods in bulk from warehouse clubs like Costco and Sam's Club.
Some have embraced the free shipping offers of some online retailers to purchase items much cheaper than available in their own communities, if at all.
Alaska is arguably the least-connected state in terms of road transportation.
The state's road system covers a relatively small area of the state, linking the central population centers and the Alaska Highway, the principal route out of the state through Canada.
The state capital, Juneau, is not accessible by road, which has spurred several debates over the decades about moving the capital to a city on the road system.
One unique feature of the road system is the Anton Anderson Memorial Tunnel, which links the Seward Highway south of Anchorage with the relatively isolated community of Whittier.
The tunnel is the longest road tunnel in North America at 2.5 miles and combines a one-lane roadway and train tracks in the same housing.
Consequently, eastbound traffic, westbound traffic, and the Alaska Railroad must share the tunnel, resulting in waits of 20 minutes or more to enter.

Most cities and villages in the state are accessible only by sea or air.
Alaska has a well-developed ferry system known as the Alaska Marine Highway System, which serves the cities of Southeast and the Alaska Peninsula.
The Alaska Marine Highway System also operates a ferry service from Bellingham, Washington up the Inside Passage to Haines.
Cities not served by road or sea can only be reached by air, accounting for Alaska's extremely well-developed Bush air services—an Alaskan novelty.

Anchorage itself, and to a lesser extent Fairbanks, are serviced by most major airlines.
Air travel is the cheapest and most efficient form of transportation in and out of the state.
Anchorage recently completed extensive remodeling and construction at Ted Stevens Anchorage International Airport to help accommodate the upsurge in tourism (unofficial sources have estimated the numbers for 2004 at some four million tourists arriving in Alaska between May and September).

But Alaska Airlines has a virtual monopoly on jet air travel within the state, meaning prices are extremely high.
The airline offers frequent jet service (sometimes in combination cargo and passenger Boeing 737-200s) from Anchorage and Fairbanks to regional hubs like Bethel, Nome, Kotzebue, Dillingham, Kodiak, and other larger communities as well as to major Southeast and Alaska Peninsula communities.
Smaller communities are served by the three main regional jet and turboprop commuter airlines: ERA Aviation, PenAir, and Frontier Flying Service.
The smallest towns and villages must rely on scheduled or chartered Bush flying services using general aviation aircraft such as the Cessna Caravan, the most popular aircraft in use in the state.
But perhaps the most quintessentially Alaskan plane is the Bush seaplane.
The world's busiest seaplane base is Lake Hood, located next to Ted Stevens airport in Anchorage, where flights bound for remote villages without even an airstrip carry passengers, cargo, and lots of items from Costco.

It is the only state that is both in North America and is not part of the 48 contiguous states; about 500 miles (800 km) of Canadian territory separate Alaska from Washington.





Alaska has no counties in the sense used in the rest of the country.


The population of the state is 626,932, according to the 2000 U.S. census.



Alaska is the only state that does not collect state sales tax or levy an individual income tax.
To finance state government operations, Alaska depends primarily on petroleum revenues.
The Department of Revenue Tax Division reports regularly on the state's revenue sources.
The Department also issues an annual overview of its operations, including new state laws that directly affect the tax division.
While Alaska does not charge a state sales tax, 89 municipalities collect a local sales tax, with a range of between 1 percent and 7 percent.
Typical sales tax rates are 3 to 5 percent.
Other types of local taxes levied include raw fish taxes, hotel and motel "bed" taxes, severance taxes, liquor and tobacco taxes, gaming (pull tabs) taxes, tire taxes and fuel transfer taxes.
A percentage of revenue collected from certain state taxes and license fees (such as petroleum, aviation motor fuel, telephone cooperative) is shared with municipalities in Alaska.
Property taxes are reasonable too, with only 25 of 161 incorporated municipalities or boroughs in the state assessing property taxes.
The average per capita property tax paid in all municipalities, excluding oil and gas properties, was US$999 (2003 data).


Conventional wisdom had it that, with its rugged individualism, penchant for new ideas, and dependence on the Federal Government largess for basic needs, it would become a Democratic stronghold, about which Republicans, and the Republican Administration of Dwight Eisenhower had reservations.



Alaska's most populous city is Anchorage, home of 260,283 people, 225,744 of whom live in the urbanized area.

See also:The climate of Alaska, as would be expected given its location, is cold compared to the climate of the other 49 states; however, there is a great variety in the climate beteen the various regions, which one would also expect from a state as large as Alaska.
Thunderstorms are uncommon in Alaska, while tornadoes have been a very rare event.
Snow, of course, occurs everywhere in Alaska, although the amount varies considerably.
The climatic areas of Alaska can best be divided into the following regions with the largest city in each region being typical of the climate expected in that region- the southeast panhandle(Juneau), the South Central(Anchorage), Western Alaska(Nome), the interior(Fairbanks), and the North Slope(Barrow).

The climate in Juneau and the southeast panhandle is best described as a "cooler version of Seattle.
On an annual basis, this is both the wettest and warmest part of Alaska with milder temperatures in the winter and high precipation throughout the year.
Juneau averages over 50 inches of precipitation a year, while other areas receive much more.
This is also the only region in Alaska in which the average daytime high temperature is above freezing during the winter months.

The climate in south central Alaska, with Anchorage as a typical city, is mild by Alaska standards.
This is due in large part to its proximity to the coast.
While it doesn't get nearly as much rain as the southeast of Alaska, it does get more snow, although days tend to be clearer here.
On average, Anchorage receives 16 inches of precipitation a year, with around 75 inches of snow, although there are areas in the south central which receive far more snow.

The climate of Western Alaska is determined in large part by the Bering Sea and the Gulf of Alaska.
The temperature is somewhat moderate considering how far north the area is.
This area has a tremendous amount of variety, especially when considering precipation.
Some areas are close to being desert (around 10 inches of precipitation annually, while others average 100 inches of precipitation or more.

The climate of the interior of Alaska is best described as extreme.
Some of the hottest and coldest temperatures in Alaska occur around the area near Fairbanks.
The summers can have temperatures reaching into the upper 80° F, while in the winter, the high temperature can stay below 0° F for several days.
Precipation isn't much in the interior, often less than 10 inches a year, but what precipation falls in the winter tends to stay the entire winter.

The climate in the extreme north of Alaska is what would be expected for an area north of the Arctic Circle- very cold in the winter and cool in the summer.
Even in July, the average low temperature is below freezing in Barrow.
Precipation is light in this part of Alaska, with many places averaging less than 10 inches a year, mostly in the form of snow which stays on the ground almost the entire year.