The molecular structure, particularly the surface area of the molecule, determines the boiling point of the alkane: the smaller the surface, the lower the boiling point, as the van der Waals forces between the molecules are weaker.
A reduction of the surface area can be achieved by chain-branching or by a circular structure.
This means in practice that alkanes with higher number of carbon atoms usually have higher boiling points than those with lower numbers of carbon atoms, and that branched-chain alkanes and cycloalkanes have lower boiling points than their straight-chain homologues.
Under standard conditions, from CH to CH alkanes are gaseous; from CH to CH they are liquids; and after CH they are solids.
The boiling point increases between 20 and 30 °C per CH-group.

The melting points of the alkanes also rise with the increase in the number of carbon atoms (with only one exception, propane).
However the melting points rise more slowly than the boiling points, in particular for the higher alkanes.
In addition, the melting points of alkanes with an odd number of carbon atoms increase faster than the melting points of alkanes with an even number of carbon atoms (see figure): the cause of this phenomenon is the higher packing density of the alkanes with an even number of carbon atoms.
The melting points of branched-chain alkanes can be either higher or lower than those of the corresponding straight-chain alkanes, depending on the efficiency of molecular packing: this is particularly true for isoalkanes (2-methyl isomers), which often have melting points higher than those of their normal analogues.

Alkanes do not conduct electricity, nor are they substantially polarized by an electric field.
For this reason they do not form hydrogen bonds and are insoluble in polar solvents such as water.
Since the hydrogen bonds between individual water molecules are aligned away from an alkane molecule, the coexistance of an alkane and water leads to an increase in molecular order (a reduction in entropy).
As there is no significant bonding between water molecules and alkane molecules, the second law of thermodynamics suggests that this reduction in entropy should be minimised by minimising the contact between alkane and water: alkanes are said to be hydrophobic in that they repel water.

CH + O → C + 2 HO Alkanes occur both on earth and in the solar system, however only about the first 100, most of it only in traces.
The light hydrocarbons are from great importance on other heavenly bodies primarily: So the two gases methane and Ethan could both in the tail of the comet Hyakutake and in some meteorites, which carbonaceous Chondriten so mentioned is proven.
They form besides an important portion of the atmospheres of the outside gas planets Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptun.
On the Saturnmond titanium even long time whole oceans from this and langkettigeren alkanes assumed, today goes out one however of the fact that if necessary smaller seas from Ethan exist.

On earth methane in traces in the atmosphere occurs, which amounts to content about 0.0001 per cent or 1 ppm ("parts by million") and primarily of the bacteroid Archaeen produced.
The content in the oceans is negligible due to the missing solubility in water, methane is however under high pressure and at low temperature in water ice frozen at the reason of the seas as methane hydrate so mentioned.
Although it cannot be diminished until today commercially, the calorific value of the well-known methane hydrate fields exceeds the energy content of all natural gas and oil deposits summed up around a repeated - from methane hydrate won methane is considered therefore as a candidate to future fuels.

The today most important commercial sources for alkanes are however clearly natural gas and oil, which occur as only organic compounds mineral in nature.
Natural gas contains primarily methane and Ethan, besides also propane and butane, oil consists against it of a mixture of liquid alkanes and other hydrocarbons.
Both developed, when dead sea animals under oxygen conclusion of sediments were covered and converted in the process of many millions years at high temperatures and high pressure to the respective natural substances.
Natural gas resulted thereby for example from the following reaction:They collected themselves then in porous rocks, which were sealed by impermeable layers upward.
Differently than methane, which is constantly formed in large measure again, higher alkanes in nature do not develop again to considerable extent.
Their occurrence will be exhausted in some decades therefore.

Starting point of the processing are always natural gas and oil.
The latter is isolated in the oil refinery by fractionated distillation and processed then to many further important products as for example gasoline.
In addition it is used that different "parliamentary groups" of the crude oil different boiling points can be possessed and separated so easily.
Within the individual parliamentary groups the boiling points lie together closely against it.

The respective operational area of a certain alkane can be divided quite well according to the number of the contained carbon atoms, although the following demarcation is idealized and does not apply strictly: The first four alkanes are used mainly for heating and cook purposes.
Methane and Ethan are the main parts of natural gas; they are normally stored under pressure in gaseous condition.
Their transport is however in the liquid condition more favorable, the gas must for this purpose then by high pressure be compressed.

Propane and butane can be liquefied and therefore come against it with low pressure in the liquid gas forwards which was used in former times even as fuel - still today it applies in the agriculture with the drive of tractors.
Propane comes for example in the propane gas burner, butane in lighters to the employment - with the withdrawal the liquid, which consists to 95 per cent of n-butane and to 5 per cent of ISO butane, which is at light pressure, goes into a mixture out of gas and purifies droplets over and can so easily be ignited.
Besides the two alkanes are used as propellants in spray doses.

Pentane to Octan easily volatile liquids are useful and therefore as fuel in usual combustion engines, since they change with the entrance into the combustion chamber easily into the gaseous condition and form no droplets there, which would impair the uniformity of the burn.
In the fuel only branched alkanes are desired, because they are not inclined like the normal easily to the spark advance.
A measure for the spark advance of a kind of gasoline is their octane number.
It indicates, in which measure a material is inclined to the early self inflammation.
When indicator for the Oktanwerte arbitrarily the two alkanes heptane (n-heptane) and ISO iso-Oktan (2,2,4-Trimethylpentan) became selected, which in each case the octane number of 0 (heptane, is inclined to spark advance) and received the octane number of 100 (ISO iso-Oktan, is hardly inclined to the self inflammation).
The octane number of a fuel indicates, its knocking characteristics correspond to which relationship of ISO iso-Oktan and heptane.
Apart from their function as fuel the middle alkanes are also good solvents for nonpolar substances.

Alkanes from Nonan to for instance to the Hexadekan, an alkane with sixteen carbon atoms, are liquids of higher viscosity, are thus more viscous and are suitable therefore with increasing carbon number ever more badly for the employment in usual gasoline.
They form instead the main part of Diesel fuel and flugbenzin.
Since the effect way of a diesel engine or a turbine differs fundamentally from that of a Otto engine, its larger thickness plays no role here.
Because of its high content of langkettigen alkanes Diesel fuel can become however firm at low temperatures, a problem that mainly in polenear areas places itself.
Finally the indicated alkanes are part of the petroleum and in former times in petroleum lamps were used.

Alkanes of the Hexadekan upward form the most important components of fuel oil and lubricating oil.
In latter function they work at the same time as anti-corrosion means, since by their hydrophobe kind no water can arrive at the corrosion endangered parts.
Many firm alkanes find use as paraffin wax, of which for example candles can be made.
It should not be confounded however with genuine wax, which consists primarily of esters.

Turned around produces some Archaeen, the Methanbildner in such a way specified, in large quantities the lightest alkane, methane, from carbon dioxide.
They win the energy necessary for it by oxidation of molecular hydrogen:Methanbildner are also the producers in moorlands and sumps freed sumpfgas, which develops in a similar way in the putrid towers of the sewage purification plants, and set free annually about two billion tons methane - the atmospheric content of this gas was produced practically exclusively by them.
Also the methane output of the cellulose digesting herbivore, of the cattle, which can set litres free daily up to 150, up to the termites decreases/goes back in the long run on Methanbildner.
In - however smaller - yardstick they produce this simplest of all alkanes also in the intestine of humans.
Methane screen end Archaeen are therefore crucially in the kohlenstoffkreislauf involved, in which they lead back photo-synthetically bound carbon again into the atmosphere.
The today's erdgasvorkommen probably decrease/go back to a large part to this group of organisms.
Also with the three eukaryotischen main groups of the organisms, the mushrooms, plants and animals alkanes play a certain, although altogether subordinated role.
With first mainly the more volatile representatives on in the sporen step; some specialized yeasts, the alkane yeasts, use alkanes besides as energy and source of carbon.
The kerosene mushroom (Amorphotheca resinae) amplifier-off-changed prefers flugbenzin from langkettigen n-alkanes.

With plants the langkettigen firm representatives are primarily; they form a firm layer of wax, which the outer skin with nearly all, which covers Cuticula, lying exposed at air.
Their function lies on the one hand in the protection against drainage, on the other hand minerals important in the precaution against washing by rains and finally in the protection from bacteria, mushrooms and harming insects - the latters sink with their legs into the soft waxlike substance and thereby in running are often obstructed.
Also the shining layer on fruits such as apples consists of langkettigen alkanes.
The carbon chains are usually long between twenty and thirty atoms and by the plants from alkane acids are usually developed.
The exact composition of the layer of wax is not kind dependent only, but changes also with the season and depends besides on environmental factors such as lighting conditions, temperature or humidity.
With animals alkanes in oelhaltigen fabrics arise, play there contrary to the insatiated hydrocarbons however no important role.
An example is the shark liver, from which an oil can be won that to approximately 14 per cent of Pristan consists, to an alkane with the structure designation 2,6,10,14-Tetramethylpentadekan (C19H40).
The occurrence is more important in pheromones, chemical messenger materials, on which above all insects are dependent for communication.
With some kinds, as the support beetle Xylotrechus colonus, that above all n-Pentacosan (C25H52), 3-Methylpentacosan (C26H54) and 9-Methylpentacosan (C26H54) produced, they are transferred by body contact, so that one speaks of contact contacts.
With others like the Tse Tse fly Glossina morsitans morsitans, their pheromone from the four alkanes 2-Methylheptadekan (C18H38), 17,21-Dimethylheptatriacontan (C39H80), 15,19-Dimethylheptatriacontan (C39H80) and 15,19,23-Trimethylheptatriacontan (C40H82) exists with priority, works the smell against it over further distances away and serves than Sexuallockstoff - a circumstance, which one makes oneself with the fight of this disease carrier.

An example, with which both the vegetable and the animal alkane use play a role, offers the ecological interrelation between the kind Andrena due to the sand bees (Andrena) nigroaenea and to the large spider Ragwurz ranked among the Orchideen (Orchidaceae) (Ophrys of sphegodes); the latter is dependent for dusting on first.
Also sand bees use pheromones to the partner identification; in the case of Andrena nigroaenea the females of the kind use a mixture that of Tricosan (C23H48), Pentacosan (C25H52) and Heptacosan (C27H56) in the ratio 3:3:1 it consists - males are attracted by specifically this odoriferous substance.
The Orchidee takes advantage of this circumstance - parts of its bloom do not resemble optical only the appearance of sand bees, but flow also large quantities of the three substances specified above out - in the same relationship.
Even the same chemical composition has the sheets covering wax as the Sexuallockstoff of the female bees.
As result numerous males are lured to the blooms and full-lead there Pseudokopulationen so mentioned, undertake thus the attempt with an imaginary Partnerin on the bloom to reproduce itself.
While this venture is not naturally for the bees crowned with success, transferred by the Kopulationsversuche pollen to the respective insect, which can be spent after frustrated departure the same too different blooms, thus the reproduction of the Orchidee serves.
The spider Ragwurz is by this alkane employment in a the position, called chemical mimicry to do without the energy-intensive production of conventional insect LOCK means to a large extent - a clear case of sexual swindle.

The spatial arrangement of the connections follows from the adjustment of the four sp³ orbital - there these are tetrahedrally arranged, are this also the CC and CH connections, also between them lie thus in each case a firm angle of 109,47 degrees.
The structural formula, which corresponds the connections of the molecules perfectly gradlinig represented, thus in this regard not to the reality.
This circumstances can be inferred also to the following diagram: The knowledge of the structural formula and the connection angle specify usually not yet completely the spatial structure of a molecule.
Thus a further degree of freedom exists for each carbon carbon connection: the angle, which in each case three the atoms and/or atomic's groups bound to the two connection atoms take to each other.
One calls the spatial arrangement described by these angles Konformation of the respective molecule.
The Ethan forms the simplest case within the material class of the alkanes; here exists exactly one CC connection.
If one looks along the axle defined by it on the molecule, then the so-called new one projection results: A carbon atom is to be seen in the projection with its three hydrogen atoms in the foreground, the other one symbolic by a circle is taken off and is by definition in the background; the connections to its three hydrogen atoms are to be seen only partial in the diagram according to.
Both the front and the rear three hydrogen atoms take 120-Grad-Winkel to each other in the projection, as this must also apply to the projection of a tetrahedron into the level.
Fixed is however the angle.
between the two groups of hydrogen atoms - it describes the Konformation in the Ethanmolekuel.

The Konformationswinkel can take arbitrary values between 0 and 360 degrees, qualitatively is however only two different Konformationen interesting: The two Konformationen, also Rotamere mentioned, differ in their energy, which is designated in this case as torsion energy, over about 12.6 Kilo joules per mol during the ekliptische Konformation this maximized and therefore unstable is, therefore it the Konformation graduated of are minimized, these are energetically preferential.
All other Konformationen lies concerning its energy between these two extremes.
The cause for the difference is not yet completely enlightened: With the ekliptischen Konformation is the distance between the CH connection electrons of the front and rear carbon atom smaller, the electrostatic repulsion between them and thus the energy of the condition therefore higher.
Turned around the graduated Konformation permits a stronger Delokalisation of the bindungselektronen, a quantum-mechanical phenomenon, which stabilizes the structure and which energy lowers.
Today the latter explanation beginning is considered as more probable.

The torsion energy of the Ethanmolekuels is small at ambient temperature in relation to the thermal energy, so that it is then in constant rotation around the CC axle.
However it "rests" in regular intervals in the graduated Konformation "", so that at each time close of the energy minimum are about 99 per cent of all molecules.
The transition between two neighbouring graduated Konformationen lasts 10-11Sekunden however only on the average.
While to the two CC connections of the propane molecule qualitatively the same applies as to Ethan, the situation for butane and all higher alkanes is more complex.

If one regards the middle CC connection of the butane molecule, then is each of the two carbon atoms to in each case two hydrogen atoms and a group of methyls bind.
How is recognizable from the new one projection, four qualitatively different Rotamere can be differentiated, between which again arbitrary transient conditions are possible.
They correspond like already with the Ethan Konformationen maximum and/or minimum energy: The gap between syn and antiperiplanarer Konformation amounts to about 19 Kilo joules per mol and is still small thereby at ambient temperature in relation to the thermal energy.
Therefore turns are still easily possible around the middle CC axle.
As is the case for the Ethan however the probability is to find a molecule in a certain condition not equal in size; for the antiperiplanare Konformation it is about twice as high as for the synklinale, while it is negligibly small for the two ekliptischen Konformationen.

In the case of the higher alkanes in principle the same picture results - for all CC connections the antiperiplanare Konformation, with which the tied up alkyl groups take the greatest possible distance, is always the energetically most favorable and therefore the one which can be most probably found.
For this reason the structure of the alkanes is usually shown by a zigzag arrangement; this is also into that far models of molecules the case which can be seen above.
The actual structure will always differ at ambient temperature something from these idealized Konformation - alkane molecules to have thus no firm Staebchenform, how the model could suggest.