In September 1967, the Manned Space Center in Houston, proposed a series of missions that would lead up to a manned lunar landing.
These seven missions tested out each component of the mission in a stepwise fashion and each previous step needed to be completed before the next mission could be undertaken.Of all the components of the Apollo system, the Lunar Module had the most issues.
It was behind schedule and when the first model was shipped to the Cape Canaveral in June 1968, over a 100 separate defects were discovered.
Grumman, who were the lead contractor for the LM predicted that the first mannable LM, to be used for Apollo 8, would not be ready until at least February 1969, delaying the entire sequence.

The answer to the problem came from George Low, the Manager of the Apollo Spacecraft Program Office in August.
He proposed that since the Command/Service Module would be ready long before the Lunar Module, they could fly a CSM-only mission in December 1968.
And instead of just repeating the flight of Apollo 7, they could send the CSM all the way to the Moon and maybe even enter into orbit.
This new mission would allow NASA to test procedures that would be used on the manned lunar landings that would otherwise have to wait until the Apollo 10 flight.
There were also concerns from the CIA that the Soviets were planning their own circumlunar flight for December to upstage the Americans once again.

Almost every senior manager at NASA had no problems with this new mission.
Wernher von Braun, in charge of the Saturn V simply stated that once you decided to put people on top of a Saturn V, it didn't matter how far you sent them.
And since the spacecraft was designed to go to the Moon, it would be ready as well.
The only person who took some convincing was James E. Webb, the NASA administrator.
However outvoted by the rest of the agency he gave his approval.
After leading the agency for eight years, he would resign just four days before the launch of Apollo 7, the first manned Apollo flight.

It was decided to swap the crews of the second and third manned flights.
Anders, Borman and Lovell would now fly on the second manned flight.
Deke Slayton, the head of the Astronaut Office first offered the flight to James McDivitt, the original commander of the second flight, but he turned it down, saying he wanted to fly the lunar module.
Borman on the otherhand jumped at the chance, since his mission was before this, going to be just a repeat of the previous flight, except in a higher orbit.

On September 9, the crew entered the simulators to begin their preparation for the flight.
By the time the mission flew, the crew would have spent 7 hours training for every actual hour of flight.
Although all crewmembers were trained for all aspects of the mission, it was necessary to specialise.
Borman as commander was given training on controlling the spacecraft during the reentry.
Lovell was trained on navigating the spacecraft in case communication was lost with the Earth.
Anders was placed in charge of checking the spacecraft was in working order.

Borman's main concern during the four months leading up to the launch was how every single person in NASA wanted the astronauts do a different task during the mission.
He would not accept any additions that were not covered by the flight simple objectives of performing the first manned Saturn V launch and going to the Moon and orbiting it.
He made sure that they only stayed as long as they needed to in lunar orbit—10 hours.

The night before the launch, the crew, now living in the crew quarters at KSC received a visit from Charles Lindbergh.
Over lunch, the Apollo 8 crew and the first man to fly across the Atlantic Ocean solo and non-stop, talked about how before his flight, Lindbergh had used a piece of string to measure the distance from New York to Paris on a globe and from this calculate the fuel needed for the flight.
It was a tenth of the amount that the Saturn V would use in a second.
The Saturn V used by Apollo 8 was SA-503, the third production model of the rocket.
When it was erected in the VAB on 20 December, 1967, it was thought that the rocket would be used for an unmanned test flight carrying a boilerplate CSM.
Although, Apollo 6 had suffered several major issues (it lost three engines and suffered severe pogo oscillations), Marshall Space Flight Center, in charge of the Saturn V, were confident that they could solve all the issues without the need for a another unmanned test flight.
So SA-503 mission was changed to a manned one.

However NASA managers did impose some restrictions on a manned flight taking place.
Firstly, the S-II second stage had to undergo cryogenic testing at Mississippi Test Facility and other changes to make sure that it 'man-rated'.
So on April 30, the Saturn V was unstacked and the second stage shipped by barge to the test site.
The spark igniters on the second and third stage engines were also modified.
In May a leak was found in an engine of the first stage, requiring it to be replaced.

With only two launches of the Saturn V under their belts, the ground crew at Kennedy Space Center were having problems keeping to the schedule.
And the Grumman crew were having their own issues with the lunar module.
Concern was expressed at the fact so much work had to be done on the lunar module after it had shipped to the Cape.
The ascent engine developed leaks that caused redesigns and valve changes.

Then in August 1968, the entire mission.
SA-503 would launch men to the Moon and wouldn't be carrying a lunar module.
In order to speed up the pre-launch preparations, much of the modification of the Saturn V was taken out of the hands of KSC and given to appropriate development centers, and only changes that affected crew safety were made.
In the end, Apollo 8 was not a full lunar flight from the prespective of the ground crews at KSC.
The rocket only carried a dummy mass instead of the real lunar module, extra insulation had been installed on the second stage and R&D instrumentation was carried everywhere on the rocket.

The Apollo 8 spacecraft was placed on top of the rocket on September 21 and the rocket made the slow 3-mile journey to the launch pad on 9 October.
Testing continued all through December right up until the day before launch.
Apollo 8 launched at 7:51 a.m. Eastern Standard Time on December 21, 1968.
The entire launch phase was practically flawless with only minor problems.
The first stage engines underperformed by 0.75%, causing the engines to burn for 2.45 seconds longer than planned.
Towards the end of the second stage burn, the rocket underwent pogo oscillations that Frank Borman estimated were of the order of 12 cycles per second and about 0.25G.
The first manned Saturn V placed the spacecraft into a 181.5 km by 191.3 km orbit with a period of 88 minutes and 10 seconds.
The apogee was also slightly higher than planned, with a planned circular orbit of 185 km.

For the next 2 hours and 38 minutes the crew and Mission Control worked to check that that spacecraft was in working in order.
At the same time the crew transformed the capsule from a rocket payload to a spacecraft.
And the S-IVB third stage had to be in working order.
On the previous unmanned test, the S-IVB had failed to reignite.
The crew could have ordered an emergency separation from the rocket if the fuel pressures exceeded allowed limits.

The first problem to affect the crew was about 73 minutes into the mission, when Jim Lovell inadvertendly caught his lifejacket on a strut in the spacecraft causing it to inflate.
The lifejacket were inflated using carbon dioxide and the crew realised that they couldn't just vent this into the spacecraft atmosphere as this would saturate the Lithium hydroxide canisters to remove the CO2 from the atmosphere of the spacecraft.
In the end, Lovell was able to rigged up the release valve of the vest to the water dump system and vented the CO2 into space.
Later analysis by mission control showed that the crew could have bleed the vest into the atmosphere of the spacecraft.
For the mean time the lifejacket was stowed.

At 2 hours, 27 minutes and 22 seconds after launch, Michael Collins, the capcom announced "Apollo 8.
You are Go for TLI".
Mission Control had given official permission for the crew to go to the moon.
Over the next twelve minutes before the burn, the crew continued to monitor the spacecraft and the rocket.
The S-IVB rocket ignited on time and burned prefectly for 5 minutes and 17 seconds.
The burn increased the velocity of the spacecraft to 10,822 m/s and their altitude at the end of the burn was 346.7 km.
At that moment they became the fastest humans in history.

Now that the S-IVB had performed its required tasks it was jettisoned.
The crew then rotated the spacecraft to take some photographs of the spent stage as well as practise flying in formation with it, as during the landing flight, the crew would have to dock with the Lunar Module stored in the S-IVB.
It was also at this time that the crew had their first views of the Earth as they moved away from it.
This was the first time humans had been able to see the entire Earth in one go.

Borman became worried that the S-IVB was staying too close to the CSM and suggested to Mission Control that the crew perform a separation maneovre.
Mission Control at first suggested pointing the spacecraft towards Earth and using the RCS thrusters to add 0.9 m/s away from the Earth, but Borman did not want to lose sight of the S-IVB.
After much discussion it was decided to burn in this direction anyway but at 2.7 m/s.
These discussions ended up putting the crew an hour behind their flight plan.

The next major event for the crew was passing though the Van Allen radiation belts.
Although it was predicted that the passage through the belts would cause a radiation dosage of no more than a chest X-ray or 0.1 rad (during the course of a year, the average human receives a dose of 0.2 to 0.3 rads), there was still interest in the radiation dosages on the crew.
So each crew member wore a Personal Radiation Dosimeter that could be read back to the ground as well as a three passive film dosimeters that show the cumulative radiation experienced by the crew.

Five hours after launch, mission control commanded the S-IVB booster to vent its remaining fuel through it engine to change its trajectory such that it would flyby the Moon and enter into a solar orbit, so as to pose no future hazard to the crew.
Jim Lovell's main job as Command Module Pilot was to act as navigator.
Although mission control performed all the actual navigation calculation, it was necessary that in case of communication loss that the crew could navigate their way home.
This was done by star sighting using a sextant built into the spacecraft, measuring the angle between the star and the Earth's (or the Moon's) horizon.
This proved to be difficult as the venting by the S-IVB had caused a large cloud of debris to form around the spacecraft, making it hard to distinguish what were the actual stars.

Lovell was able to calculate velocity and position values in agreement with those calculated by Mission Control after several attempts.
At this stage of the flight, the controllers were less interested in the actual values, but to how consistent Lovell could be at using the fuzzy horizon of the Earth.
Due to the atmosphere the horizon is not a distinct line as seen from space.

By seven hours into the mission, the delay in moving away from the S-IVB and Lovell's star sighting has meant that they are behind schedule on the flight plan by about one hour and 40 minutes.
The crew now placed the spacecraft into Passive Thermal Control (PTC), or what is more aptly called barbecue mode.
This had the spacecraft roll about one rotation per hour, along its long axis in order to ensure even heat distribution of the spacecraft.
In direct sunlight, the spacecraft could be heated to over 200°C while the parts in shadow would be -100°C.
These temperatures could cause the heatshield to crack or propellant lines to burst.
As it was impossible to get a perfect roll, the spacecraft actually swept out a cone as it rotated.
This would have to be trimmed every half hour as it started to get larger and larger.

The first mid-course correction came 11 hours into the flight.
Testing on the ground had shown the there was a chance that the Service Propulstion System (SPS) engine would explode when burned for long periods unless it combustion chamber was 'coated' first.
This could be done by burning the engine for a short period.
This first correction burn was only 2.4 seconds and added about 6.2 m/s posigrade (in the direction of travel).
This was less than the 7.5 m/s planned, and the shortfall was due to a bubble of helium in the oxidiser lines causing lower than expected fuel pressure, requiring the crew to use the RCS to make up the shortfall.
Two later planned midcourse corrections were cancelled as the trajectory was found to perfect.

After being in space for 11 hours, Apollo 8 was now 98,500 km from Earth and had a speed of 2,479 m/s.
The crew had been awake for over 16 hours, having been awakened about 5 hours before launch.
So it was time for Frank Borman to start his scheduled 7 hours sleep period.
It proved difficult to sleep.
NASA had decided that at least one crew member should be awake at all times to deal with any emergencies that may arise.
But the constant radio chatter with the ground and the air circulation fans made it hard to sleep.
As well as this, sleeping in space is a somewhat unnatural experience—you can't rest your head on a pillow and Bill Anders said that he would suddenly jolt awake with the sensation that he was falling.
It was also around this time that the crew finally got around to dealing with the life vest inflated by Lovell earlier in the mission.

About an hour after starting his sleep period, Borman requested clearance to take a Seconal sleeping pill.
The sleeping pill had little effect and in fact may have even caused the medical issue that later struck Borman.
After Borman fitfulling slept for seven hours he awoke feeling ill.
He vomited twice, had a bout of diarrhea that left the spacecraft full of small globules of vomit and feces.
After cleaning up as best as they could, Borman decided that he doesn't want the world to know about his medical problems but Lovell and Anders still want to tell the ground.
They decided to use the Data Storage Equipment (DSE), which could be used by the crew to tape voice recordings, which were then dumped to the ground at high speed.
After recording a description of Bormans illness they requested that mission control check the recording as the crew "would like an evaluation of the voice comments".

A conference between the crew and medical personel was held in using the unoccupied third floor control room (there were two control rooms in Houston, of which only one is used during the course of a mission).
During a private communication with the crew, it was decided that there was little to worry about and that it either a 24 hour flu as Borman thought, or just a reaction to the sleeping pill.
In fact it is now thought that he was suffering from Space Adaptation Syndrome, which affects about a third of astronauts during their first day in space as their vestibular system adapts to weightlessness.

The cruise phase was a relatively uneventful part of the flight.
Little happened except for the crew checking that the spacecraft was in working order and they were on course.
During this time, NASA scheduled a television broadcast for 31 hours after launch.
The camera used was 2 kg and broadcast in black-and-white only, using a Vidicon tube.
It had two lenses, a very wide-angle (160°) lens and a a narrow-angle (9°) lens.

During this first broadcast the crew gave a tour of the spacecraft and attempted to show how the Earth appeared.
However this was impossible to do so, as the narrow-angle lens was difficult to aim without the aid of a monitor to show what it was looking at.
Also without proper filters, the image became saturated by any bright source.
In the end all the crew could do was show the people watching back on Earth a bright blob.
After broadcasting for 17 minutes the rotation of the spacecraft takes the High Gain Antenna out of view of the receiving stations on Earth and they ended the transmission with Lovell wishing his mother happy birthday.

By this time the planned sleep periods had completely been abandoned.
32½ hours into the flight the Lovell went to bed, 3½ hours before he was planned to.
A short while later Anders also went to bed after taking a sleeping pill.
During the quiet periods of the flight, Borman and the capcom Jerry Carr discussed the football (it was the playoffs in the NFL) and also how Carr had been at the home of another astronaut Charlie Duke the night before and Bill Anders wife, Val had dropped in.
Also discussed was the release of the USS Pueblo crew after being held captive by the North Koreans for 11 months.

Somewhat strangely the crew were unable to see the moon for much of the outward cruise.
Three of the five windows had fogged up (from outgassed oils from the silicon sealant) and due to the attitude required for the PTC, the moon was almost impossible to see from inside the spacecraft.
In fact it wasn't until the crew had gone behind the Moon that would be able to see it for the first time.

A second television broadcast came at 55 hours.
This time the crew had managed to rig up filters meant for the still cameras so that they could aquire images of the Earth through the telephoto lens.
Although difficult to aim as they had to manouerve the entire spacecraft, the crew were able to broadcast back to Earth the first television pictures of the Earth.
The crew spent the transmission describing the Earth and what was visible and the colors that could be seen.
After 23 minutes transmitting video of the Earth, the transmission ended.
At about 55 hours and 40 minutes into the flight, the crew of Apollo 8 became the first humans to enter the sphere of influence of another celestial body.
Or to put it another way, the Moon's gravitational force became stronger than that of the Earth.
At the time it happened, they were 62,377 km from the Moon and had a speed of 1,216 m/s with respect to the Moon.
This historic moment was of little interest to the crew as they still calculated their trajectory with respect to the launch pad at Kennedy Space Center and would do so until they performed their last midcourse correction, when they switch to a reference frame based on ideal orientation for second engine burn they would make in lunar orbit.
It was only thirteen hours until they would be in lunar orbit.

The last major event before Lunar Orbit Insertion was a second midcourse correction.
It was in a retrograde (against direction of travel) and slowed the spacecraft down by 0.6 m/s, in effect lowering the closest distance that the spacecraft would pass the moon.
At exactly 61 hours after launch, about 39,000 km from the Moon, the crew burned the RCS for 11 seconds.
They would now pass 115.4 km from the lunar surface.

At 64 hours into the flight, the crew began to prepare for Lunar Orbit Insertion (LOI).
This manoerve had to be performed perfectly, and due to orbital mechanics had to be on the farside of the Moon, out of contact with the Earth.
After Mission Control was polled for a Go/No Go decision, the crew were told at 68 hours, they were Go and "riding the best bird we can find".
At 68 hours and 58 minutes, the spacecraft went behind the Moon and out of radio contact with the Earth.

With ten minutes before the LOI, the crew began one last check of the spacecraft systems and made sure that every switch was in the correct place.
Then they finally got their first glimpses of the Moon.
They had been flying over the unlit side, and it was Lovell who saw the first shafts of sunlight obliquely illuminating the lunar surface.
But the burn was only two minutes away so the crew had little time to appreciate the view.
Igniting at 69 hours, 8 minutes and 16 seconds after launch, the SPS burned for 4 minutes and 13 seconds, placing the crew of Apollo 8 in orbit around the Moon.
The crew described this as being the longest four minutes of their lives.
If the burn hadn't lasted exactly the right amount of time, the spacecraft could have ended up in a highly elliptical lunar orbit or even flung off into space.
After making sure the spacecraft was working, they finally had a chance to look at the Moon, which they would orbit for the following 20 hours.

On Earth, Mission Control continued to wait.
If the crew had not burned the engine or the burn had not lasted the planned length of time the crew would appear early from behind the Moon.
However this time came and went without Apollo 8 reappearing.
It was at least known the engine had burned for some amount of time.
And then exactly at the predicted moment, the signal from the spacecraft received indicating it was in a 311.1 km by 111.9 km orbit about the Moon.

Lovell continued to describe the terrain that they were passing over.
One of the crews major tasks was reconnaisance of the planned landing sites on the Moon, especially one in Mare Tranquillitatis that would be the Apollo 11 landing site.
The launch time of Apollo 8 had been chosen to give the best lighting conditions for the site.
A film camera had been set up in one of the windows to record a frame every second of the Moon below.
And Bill Anders would spend much of the next 20 hours taking as many photographs as he could of targets that the flight plan indicated were to imaged.

Throughout the a hour that the spacecraft was in contact with the Earth, Borman keeps asking how the data for the SPS looked.
He wanted to make sure that the engine was working and could be used to return early to the Earth if necessary.
He also asked that they receive a Go/No Go decision before they pass behind the Moon on each orbit.

Using what is sometimes called explorer's perogative, the crew had named many of the unnamed features on the Moon.
One in particular became famous due to the movie Apollo 13—Mount Marilyn.
Named after Jim Lovell's wife, the mountain was southeastern corner of Mare Tranquillitatis and was on the incoming path of the Apollo 11 crew.
None of the names chosen by the crew were accepted by International Astronomical Union who in part chose the names for astronomical objects (see Planetary nomenclature).
Most of the names chosen by astronauts honored other astronauts, or other people involved in the space program at the time.

Over the next two orbits the crew continued to keep check of the spacecraft and to observe and photograph the Moon.
Then as they came out from behind the Moon for their fourth pass across the front, the crew witnessed an event never before seen—Earthrise.
Anders, glanced out the window and saw a blue orb and realised it was the Earth.
Instantly the crew understood that they needed to take a photograph of this.
Anders took both the first photograph, which was black-and-white and then later the more famous color photo.

Anders continued to take photographs while Lovell took the controls of the spacecraft so that Borman could get some rest.
As always resting was difficult in the cramped and noisy capsule, though Borman was able to dose for two orbits.
He would awaken at times to ask a question about their status, only to be told that everything was going fine.
While he was sleeping, Anders wondered aloud, "did you guys ever think that one Christmas Eve you'd be orbiting the Moon?"
And then jokingly said "just hope we're not doing it on New Year's".
Lovell didn't find this funny replying "hey, hey, don't talk like that, Bill.
Think postive".

Borman did wake up however when he started to hear his fellow crewmembers make mistakes.
They were beginning to not understand questions and would have to ask for the answers to be repeated.
Borman realised that everyone was extremely tired having not had a good nights sleep in over three days.
Taking command, he order Anders and Lovell to get some sleep and that the rest of the flight plan regarding observing the Moon be scrubbed.
At first Anders protested saying that he way fine, by Borman would not be swayed.
At last Anders agreed as long as the commander would set up the camera to continue to take automatic shots of the Moon.
Borman also remembered that there was a second television broadcast planned and with so many people expected to be watching he wanted to crew to be alert.
For the next two orbits the Anders and Lovell slept while Borman sat at the helm.

As they rounded the Moon for the ninth time, the second television transmission began.
After Borman introduced the crew, each man gave his impression of the lunar surface and what it was like to be orbiting the Moon.
Borman described it as being "a vast, lonely, forbidding type of existence or expanse of nothing".
And then after talking about what they were flying over, Anders said that the crew had a message for all those on Earth.
This was followed by each man reading a section of Genesis 1:1-10, the story of Creation.
Borman closed with:

The only thing left for the crew now was the perform the Trans-Earth Injection or TEI which would occur 2½ after the end of the television transmission.
This was the most critical burn of the whole flight.
If the SPS didn't burn, then the crew would be stuck in orbit around the Moon, with only about 5 more days of oxygen and no chance of escape.
And once again the burn had to be performed while the crew were out of contact with Earth, on the farside of the Moon.

The burn occurred perfectly on time.
At 89 hours, 28 minutes and 39 seconds, the spacecraft telemetry was reaquired as it reemerged from behind the Moon, the exact time predicted.
When voice contact was regained, Lovell announced "Please be informed, there is a Santa Claus", to which Ken Mattingly, the capcom, replied "That's affirmative, You are the best ones to know".
It was Christmas Day, 1968.
The cruise back to Earth was mostly a time to relax for the crew and to monitor the spacecraft.
As long as the trajectory specialists had calculated everything correctly, the spacecraft would reenter 2½ days after TEI and splashdown in the Pacific.

On Christmas afternoon, the crew broadcast their fifth and final television transmission.
This time they gave a tour of the spacecraft, showing how a astronaut lived in space.
When they had finished broadcasting they found a small present from Deke Slayton in the food locker—real turkey&stuffing and three minature bottles of brandy.
Borman was not impressed by the bottles and so they remained unopened for the rest of the flight.
There was also small presents to the crew from their wives.

After two uneventful days the crew prepared for reentry.
The computer would control the reentry and all the crew had to do was put the spacecraft in the correct attitude, blunt end forward.
If the computer had broken down, Borman would have taken over.

After separating from the Service Module, all the crew could do was site and wait.
Six minutes before they hit the top of the atmosphere, the crew saw the Moon rising above the Earth's horizon, just as had been predicted by the trajectory specialists.
As they hit the thin outer atmosphere they noticed it becoming hazy outside as a glowing plasma formed around the capsule.
Quickly the G forces built.
It peaked a 6G, the equivalent of having a elephant sitting on your chest.
With the computer controlling the descent by changing the attitude of the capsule, Apollo 8 rose briefly like a skipping stone before descending to the ocean.
At 30,000 feet the drogue parachute stablised the spacecraft and was followed at 10,000 feet by the three main parachutes.

When it hit the water, the parachutes dragged the spacecraft over and left it upside down in what was termed Stable 2 position.
As they were buffeted by 10-foot swell, Borman was sick, waiting for the three floatation balloons to right the capsule.
It was 43 minutes after splashdown before the first frogman from the USS Yorktown arrived, as the capsule had landed before sunrise.
45 minutes later they were on the deck of the aircraft carrier.

The patch for Apollo 8 was designed by Jim Lovell.
It is shaped like an Apollo Command Module and also like an 'A' for Apollo.
The figure eight signifies the mission number and also the trajectory of the spacecraft on a free-return trajectory.

Yet over all these other events, TIME magazine chose the crew of Apollo 8 as their Men of the Year for 1968, recognising them as the people that most influenced events in the preceding year.
They had been the first people to ever leave the gravitational influence of the Earth and orbit another celestial body.
They had survived a mission that even the crew had themselves had rated as only having a fifty-fifty chance of fully succeeding.
The effect of Apollo 8 can be summed up by a telegram received by the crew after the mission that simply stated "Thank you Apollo 8.
You saved 1968."

One of the most famous aspects of the flight was the Earthrise picture that was taken as they came around for their forth orbit of the Moon.
Although it was not the first image taken of the whole Earth nor would it be the last, this was the first time that humans had taken such a picture.
Some regard the picture as being the start of the environmentalist movement, with the first Earth Day in 1970.

The mission was the most widely covered by the media since the first American orbital flight by John Glenn.
There were 1200 journalists covering the mission, with the BBC coverage being broadcast in 54 countries in 15 different languages.
The Soviet newspaper Pravda even covered the flight without the usual anti-American editorialising.
It is estimated that a quarter of the people alive at the time saw either live or delayed the Christmas Eve transmission during the ninth orbit of the Moon.