The mathematical notations, widely used in physics and other sciences, are supposed to avoid any ambiguity.
However, the application of mathematics  require all possible simplifications.
It is common practive, to avoid sign of  pultiplication in mathematical expressions.
Also, it is common, to give the same name to a variable and a funciton, for example,.
Then, if one sees, there is no way to distinguish, does it mean  by, or funciton  at value of argument equal to.
In each case of use of such notations, the reader is supposed to be able to perform the deduction by ownself and reveal the true meaning.
Many alforithmic languages (C++, matlab, fortran, Maple) require character * as symbol of multiplication.
The language Mathematica allows to omit the multiplication symbol, but requires that the squared parenthesis to indicate the argument of a funciton, and does not allow these parenthesis for grouping of expressions.

The order of operations may depend on the context.
In the most of  programming languages, the operation of division and pultiplication have equal priority and are executed from left to right.
Until past century, many editorials assumed, that the multiplication is performed first, for example,  is interpreted as; in this case, the incertion of  parenthesis is requires at the translation of the formulas to an algorithmic language.

The ambiguity can be used as pedagogical trick, to force students to reproduce the deduction by themselves.
Some textboks (for ex., H.Haug, S.Koch.
Quantum Theory of the Optical and Electronic Properties of Semiconductors, ) give the sams name to the function and to its Fourier transform:.
Then, the expressions with  become ambiguous; and some tricks are used to give the reader a hint, what funciton is used:  it is first funciton, if the expression in the argument contains more characters, than characters; and second function in the  opposite case.
Expressions like or  contain symbols and  in equal amount; they are ambiguius and should be avoided in serious deducion.
Perhaps, no

Wikipedians have to deal with ambiguities, including those in mathematics.
There are wide discussions about notation for some functions (see, for example, Elliptic funcitons and Elliptic integrals.
However, Wikipedia cannot avoid amniguities; but ambiguities should be explicitly declared.

In Continental philosophy (particularly phenomenology and existentialism), there is much greater tolerance of ambiguity, as it is generally seen as an integral part of the human condition.
Martin Heidegger argued that the relation between the subject and object is ambiguous, as is the relation of mind and body, or part and whole..
In Heidegger's phenomenology, Dasein is always in a meaningful world, but there is always an underlying background for every instance of signfication.
Thus, although some things may be certain, they have little to do with Dasein's sense of care and existential anxiety, e.g., in the face of death.
In calling his work Being and Nothingness an "essay in phenomenological ontology" Jean-Paul Sartre follows Heidegger in defining the human essence as ambiguous, or relating to such ambiguity.
Simone de Beauvoir tries to base an ethics on Heidegger's and Sartre's writings (The Ethics of Ambiguity), where she highlights the need to grapple with ambiguity: "as long as philosophers and they have thought, most of them have tried to mask it...And the ethics which they have proposed to their disciples has always pursued thre same goal.
It has been a matter of eliminating the ambiguity by making oneself pure inwardness or pure externality, by escaping from the sensible world or being engulfed by it, by yielding to eternity or enclosing oneself in the pure moment.".
Ethics cannot be based on the authoritative certainty given by mathematics and logic, or prescribed directly from the empirical findings of science.
She states: "Since we do not succeed in fleeing it, let us therefore try to look the truth in the face.
Let us try to assume our fundamental ambiguity.
It is in the knowledge of the genuine conditions of our life that we must draw our strength to live and our reason for acting.".
Other continental philosophers suggest that concepts such as life, nature, and sex are ambiguous.
Recently, Corey Anton has argued that we cannot be certain what is separate from or unified with something else: language, he asserts, divides what is not in fact separate.
Following Ernest Becker, he argues that the desire to 'authoritatively disambiguate' the world and existence has led to numerous ideologies and historical events such as genocide.
On this basis, he argues that ethics must focus on 'dialectically integrating opposites' and balancing tension, rather than seeking a priori validation or certainty.
Like the existentialists and phenomenologists, he sees the ambiguity of life as the basis of creativity.