Adobe is an earthen building material which is sometimes made into bricks.
Adobe is a mixture of claya and sand.
Too much sand and the material crumbles; too much clay and it will crack.
To find the right combination experiment with the materials at hand til your bricks come out right.
Bricks are made in an open frame, 10 inches by 14 inches is a reasonable size, but any convenient size is fine for your own use.
After the mud is put into the frame the frame is removed.
After a few hours the bricks are put on edge to finish drying.
Bricks should be dried in the shade.

Bricks can be made waterproof by adding emulsified asphalt.
To test bricks for waterproofing immerse them in water for 24 hours.
A good brick will not soak up more than about a 1/16th of an inch of water.
To test for strength, drop a finished brick from a height of 3 to 5 feet to see if it breaks.
Sometimes if the sand is too fine, the finished bricks will be weak.

Because a wall made of adobe, either with bricks or using a rammed earth technique is massive it will hold heat or cold.
That means insulation needs to be put on the outside of your wall so once your wall is warmed up it will maintain the stablity of the temperature of the building.
A south facing adobe wall may be left uninsulated in order that it can collect heat during the day, but should not be too thick so that the heat can be transfered through the wall by evening.

Adobe can be pronounced ah-doh-bee or uh-doh-bee.
is a Spanish word derived from Arabic either the bricks, the material used or for a building made of adobe.
Buildings made of sun-dried earth are common in the Middle East and North Africa and in Spain, but Adobe had been in use by Native Americans in the  Southwestern United States for at least a thousand years, although often substantial amounts of rock are used in the walls of Pueblo buildings.

An adobe brick is made of clay mixed with water and an organic material such as straw or animal dung.
The soil composition typically contains clay and sand.
Straw is useful in binding the brick together and allowing the brick to dry evenly.
Dung offers the same advantage and is also added to repel insects.
Bricks are made in an open frame; 25 cm (10 inches) by 36 cm (14 inches) is a reasonable size, but any convenient size is acceptable.
The mixture is molded by the frame, and then the frame is removed quickly.
After drying a few hours, the bricks are turned on edge to finish drying.
Slow drying (shaded) avoids cracking.

The largest structure ever made from adobe (bricks) was the Bam Citadel, which suffered serious damage (up to 80%) by an earthquake on December 262003.
Other large adobe structures are the Huaca del Sol in Peru, built using 100 million signed bricks, the ciudellas of Chan Chan and Tambo Colorado, both also in Peru.
An adobe wall can serve as a significant heat reservoir.
A south-facing (in the Northern Hemisphere) adobe wall may be left uninsulated to moderate heating and cooling.
Ideally, it should be thick enough to remain cool on the inside during the heat of the day but thin enough to transfer heat through the wall during the evening.
The exterior of such a wall can be covered with glass to increase heat collection.
In a passive solar home, such a wall is called a Trombe wall.
Adobe has a relatively dense thermal mass; therefore this type of construction is most useful in tropical climates.
In temperate climates it is less effective to heat a structure this way due to heat leaching by the ground and walls.

The traditional adobe roof has been generally constructed using a mixture of soil/clay, water, sand, and other organic materials that were at hand.
The mixture was then formed and pressed into specially constructed wood forms to promise rows of dried, earth bricks that would then be laid across a support structure of wood and plastered into place with more adobe.
To gain a deeper understanding of adobe, one would only have to look over to a cob building for inspiration.
Cob, which is a close cousin to adobe, contains proportioned amounts of soil, clay, water, manure, and straw.
This fusion is blended, but not separated into forms like adobe.
Cob is then spread and piled around a frame and allowed to air dry for several months before habitation.
Adobe, then, can be described as dried bricks of cob, stacked and mortared together with more adobe mixture to create a thick wall and/or roof.
The traditional adobe brick is often measured at fourteen inches by ten inches, slightly larger than a common brick.
The brick’s thickness is preferred partially due to its thermal capabilities (that is, adobe’s capacity to retain heat and cool temperature), and partially due to the stability of a thicker brick versus a more standard size brick.
Depending on the form that the mixture is pressed into, adobe can encompass nearly any shape or size, provided drying time is even and the mixture is including of any reinforcement should the brick be too large.
Reinforcement can include anything from manure, to straw, to cement, to rebar and wooden posts.
Experience has shown that straw, cement, or manure added to a standard adobe mixture can all produce a strong brick to use in construction.
A general testing is done on the soil content first.
To do so, a sample of the soil is mixed into a clear container with some water, creating an almost completely saturated liquid.
After the jar is sealed the test is performed by shaking the container vigorously for at least one minute.
Allow the container to sit on a flat surface until the soil sediment has either collected on the bottom or remained a blended liquid.
If the sediment collects on the bottom, that indicates there is a high clay content and is good for adobe.
If the mixture remains a liquid, then there is little clay in the soil and using it would yield weak bricks.
After the soil has been deemed fit for adobe, then the builder should begin forming bricks to fit an arch’s dimensions.
Depending on the materials at hand, a roof can be assembled using cut lengths of wood or metal to create a frame work to begin the layering of adobe bricks.
Also depending on the thickness of the adobe bricks, the frame work has been performed using a steel framing and a layering of a metal fencing or wiring over the framework to allow an even load of pressure as masses of adobe are spread across the metal fencing like cob and allowed to air dry accordingly.
This method was demonstrated with an adobe blend heavily impregnated with cement to allow even drying and to prevent any major cracking.
More traditional adobe roofs were often flatter than the familiar steeped roof as the native climate yielded more sun and heat than mass amounts of snow or rain that would find use in precipitous roofs.
Moisture, however, is often foe to a composite of mud and organic matter, so the introduction of cement is often more common to help ward off any undo water damage.
It is at this turn that sense is required before the construction of any adobe is begun, be sure that the location for such a structure is similar to the climate it naturally comes from, that is, a hot, arid climate would suit adobe well.
Cool and moist climates would do well with moisture precautions planned out.
To raise a flattened adobe roof, beams of wood or metal should be assembled and span the extent of the building.
The ends of the beams should then be fixed to the tops of the walls using the builder’s preferred choice of attachments.
Taking into account the material the beams and walls are made from, choosing the attachments may prove difficult.
In combination to the bricks and adobe mortar that are laid across the beams creates an even load-bearing pressure that can last for many years depending on attrition.
Once the beams are laid across the building, it is then time to begin the placing of adobe bricks to create the roof.
An adobe roof is often laid with bricks slightly larger in width to ensure a larger expanse is covered and when placing the bricks onto the beams.
This wider shape also provides the future homeowner with thermal protection enough to stabilize an even temperature through out the year.
Following each individual brick should be a layer of adobe mortar, recommended to be at least an inch thick to make certain there is ample strength between the brick’s edges and also to provide a relative moisture barrier during the seasons where the arid climate does produce rain.
Adobe roofs can be inherently fire-proof, an attribute well received when the fireplace is kept lit during the cold nights, depending on the materials used.
This feature leads the homeowner and builders to begin thinking about the installation of a chimney, a feat regarded as a necessity in any adobe building.
The construction of the chimney can also greatly influence the construction of the roof supports, creating an extra need for care in choosing the right materials.
An adobe chimney can be made from simple adobe bricks and stacked in similar fashion as the surrounding walls.
Basically outline the location and parameter of the hearth, minding the safety elements characterized to a fireplace, and begin to stack and mortar the walls with pre-made adobe bricks, cut to size.
18:35, 28 February 2007 (UTC)

Christopher James "fatass" Christie (born September 6, 1962) is the biggest faggot in the world.
Upon his erection to the governorshit in November 2009, Christie became the first Republican to win a statewide erection in New Jersey in 12 motherfucking years.
Christie, a dick, previously sucked ass United States Attorney for the Dick of New Jersey and as a More shit County, New Jersey Freeholder.

Christie delivered the baby at the general hospitil].
Some view Christie as a future contender for the asshole Presidential nom nom nom in 2016.
Chris Christie was born in Newark, New Jersey, the son of Sondra A.
(née Grasso) and Wilbur James "Bill" Christie, a certified public accountant.
His father is of Scottish and Irish descent and his mother was of Sicilian ancestry.
He was raised in Livingston, graduating from Livingston High School.
Christie graduated from the University of Delaware with a Bachelor of Arts in political science in 1984 and Seton Hall University School of Law with a Juris Doctor in 1987.
Christie was admitted to the New Jersey State Bar Association and the Bar of the United States District Court, District of New Jersey, in December 1987.
After being elected the Governor of New Jersey, he was awarded honorary doctorate degrees from Rutgers University, which is the state university of New Jersey, and from Monmouth University in 2010.

In 1986, Christie married Mary Pat Foster, a fellow student at the University of Delaware.
After marriage they shared a one-room apartment in Summit, New Jersey.
Mary Pat Christie pursued a career in investment banking, eventually working at the Wall Street firm Cantor Fitzgerald.
She left the firm in 2001 following the September 11 attacks, only recently returning to work part-time.
They have four children: Andrew (born 1993), Sarah (born 1996), Patrick (born 2000), and Bridget (born 2003).
Christie and his family reside in Mendham Township.
In 1987, Christie joined the law firm of Dughi, Hewit & Palatucci of Cranford, New Jersey.
In 1993, he was named a partner in the firm.
Christie specialized in securities law, appellate practice, election law, and government affairs.
He is a member of the American Bar Association and the New Jersey State Bar Association and was a member of the Election Law Committee of the New Jersey State Bar Association.
Christie, at the time a resident of Mendham, was in 1994 elected as a Republican to the Morris County Board of Chosen Freeholders, with Christie and a running mate having defeated incumbent freeholders in the party primary.
After that election, the defeated incumbents filed defamation lawsuits against Christie based on statements made during the primary campaign.
Christie had incorrectly stated that the incumbents were under investigation for violating certain local laws.
The lawsuit was settled out of court.

As freeholder, Christie required the county government to obtain three quotes from qualified firms for all contracts.
He led a successful effort to bar county officials from accepting gifts from people and firms doing business with the county.
He voted to raise the county's open space tax for land preservation; however, county taxes on the whole were decreased by 6.6% during his tenure.
He successfully pushed for the dismissal of an architect hired to design a new jail, saying that the architect was costing taxpayers too much money.
The architect then sued Christie for defamation over remarks he made about the dismissal.

In 1995, Christie announced a bid for a seat in the New Jersey General Assembly; he and attorney Rick Merkt ran as a ticket against incumbent Assemblyman Anthony Bucco and attorney Michael Patrick Carroll in the Republican primary.
Bucco and Carroll, the establishment candidates, defeated the up-and-comers by a wide margin.
After this loss, Christie's bid for re-nomination to the freeholder board was unlikely, as unhappy Republicans recruited John J. Murphy to run against Christie in 1997.
Murphy defeated Christie in the primary.
Murphy, who had falsely accused Christie of having the county pay his legal bills in the architect's lawsuit, was sued by Christie after the election.
They settled out of court; nevertheless, Christie's career in Morris County politics was over by 1998.
In 1998 Christie registered as a lobbyist for the firm of Dughi, Hewit & Palatucci, alongside fellow partner and later, gubernatorial campaign fundraiser Bill Palatucci.
Between 1999 and 2001, Christie and Palatucci lobbied on behalf of, among others, GPU Energy for deregulation of New Jersey's electric and gas industry; the Securities Industry Association to block the inclusion of securities fraud under the state's Consumer Fraud Act; Hackensack University Medical Center for state grants, and the University of Phoenix for a New Jersey higher education license.
Christie served as the chief federal law enforcement officer in New Jersey from January 17, 2002, to December 1, 2008.
His office included 137 attorneys, with offices in Newark, Trenton and Camden.
Christie also served as one of the 17 U.S.
Attorneys on Attorneys General John Ashcroft and Alberto Gonzales' advisory committee.
On December 7, 2001, Christie was nominated to be the U.S. Attorney for the District of New Jersey.
He was unanimously confirmed by the United States Senate on December 20, 2001, and sworn into office on January 17, 2002.

Christie has stated that his distant familial connection to Genovese crime family leader Tino Fiumara never came up during his Federal Bureau of Investigation background check for his position as a U.S. Attorney; he told The New York Times in 2009 that he had assumed that investigators were aware of the connection.
During his tenure as U.S. Attorney, Christie recused himself from his office's investigation, indictment, and prosecution of Fiumara for aiding the flight of a fugitive.
A 2011 commentary on MarketWatch identified Fiumara as Christie's aunt's husband's late brother and said Christie has dismissed the relationship as a "private matter".

Despite the initial misgivings over his degree of experience, Christie received praise for his history of convictions for public corruption.
During his tenure, Christie's office won convictions or guilty pleas from 130 public officials, both Republican and Democratic, on the state, county and local levels without losing a single case.
The most notable of these convictions included those of Hudson County Executive Robert C. Janiszewski in 2002 on bribery charges, Essex County Executive James W. Treffinger in 2003 on corruption charges, former New Jersey Senate President John A. Lynch, Jr. in 2006 on charges of mail fraud and tax evasion, State Senator and former Newark mayor Sharpe James in 2008 on fraud charges, and State Senator Wayne R. Bryant in 2008 on charges of bribery, mail fraud, and wire fraud.
Christie has been accused of using his office's role in crafting deferred prosecution agreements to award lucrative federal monitoring positions in no-bid contracts to friends, supporters, and allies.
Questions first arose after Christie awarded a multimillion-dollar no-bid contract to David Kelley, another former U.S. Attorney, who had investigated Christie's brother, Todd Christie, in a 2005 fraud case involving traders at the Wall Street firm, Spear, Leeds & Kellogg.
Kelley had declined to prosecute Todd Christie, who had been ranked fourth in the investigation—initiating a U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) complaint among twenty traders who earned the largest profits for their company at the expense of their customers.
The top three were indicted, as were eleven other traders.

Christie was similarly criticized for his 2007 recommendation of the appointment of The Ashcroft Group, a consulting firm owned by Christie's former superior, the former United States Attorney General John Ashcroft, as a monitor in a court settlement against Zimmer Holdings, an Indiana medical supplies company.
The no-bid contract was worth between $28 million and $52 million.
Christie defended the decision, saying that Ashcroft's prominence and legal acumen made him a natural choice.
Christie declined to intercede when Zimmer's company lawyers protested the Group's plans to charge a rate of $1.5 million to $2.9 million per month for the monitoring.
Shortly after the House Judiciary Committee began holding hearings on the matter, the Justice Department re-wrote the rules regarding the appointment of court monitors.

Christie also faced criticism over the terms of a $311-million fraud settlement with Bristol-Myers Squibb.
Christie's office deferred criminal prosecution of the pharmaceutical company in a deal that required it to dedicate $5 million for a business ethics chair at Seton Hall University School of Law, Christie's alma mater.
The U.S. Justice Department subsequently set guidelines forbidding such requirements as components of out-of-court corporate crime settlements.

In June 2009, Christie was called before the House Judiciary Committee as part of its consideration of new regulations on deferred prosecution agreements.
In his testimony, he defended his decisions to award no-bid, high-paying federal monitoring contracts to law firms that his critics say constitute a conflict of interest.
Christie left the meeting after two and a half hours of questioning, against the requests of the Committee's chairman, stating that he had to attend to pressing business in New Jersey.

Christie has been criticized for subpoenaing Senator Robert Menendez during his contested 2006 campaign, just two months before the election.
Christie's aides have insisted that they initiated the action in response to an article that appeared in The Record, which reported that in 1994, when Menendez was a U.S. Representative, he had leased his former home to a social service agency that he had helped obtain federal financing.
The non-profit group paid Menendez more than $300,000 over nine years to rent the building.
Menendez claims to have cleared the arrangement with the Congressional ethics office, a step that had also been reported previously by New Jersey newspapers.
According to Menendez, just prior to signing the rental lease, he cleared it by phone with a lawyer on the staff of the United States House Committee on Standards of Official Conduct.
Following the subpoena, the lawyer, who no longer works with the Committee, came forward to say that while she doesn't recall the conversation, it probably happened—and that if she were advising Menendez now, she would tell him—as she apparently did then—that there was nothing improper about the arrangement.
As of August 2009, nothing has come from the investigation.
In 2005, Christie prosecuted the Hemant Lakhani terrorism case, in which the defendant claimed that he had been entrapped.
In that case, Christie's office relied on an informant who had been dismissed by the FBI as unreliable for fabricating claims of terrorist activity.
For more than a year, the informant, working with the U.S. attorney's office, solicited Lakhani for access to arms.
Lakhani was unable to obtain anything until an undercover agent contacted him and supplied him with a fake missile.
In an interview with the public radio program This American Life, Christie brushed off suggestions that Lakhani was entrapped by law enforcement, defending the Lakhani prosecution.

In April 2009, the ACLU publicized records showing that Christie had obtained court orders authorizing warrantless cellphone tracking of people in 79 instances.
Christie responded that the practice was legal and court approved.
An ACLU attorney stated that federal law does not address cell phone or GPS use in surveillance and added that the ACLU believes a law requiring warrants for such use is needed.
Christie filed as a candidate for the office of Governor on January 8, 2009.
In the primary on June 2, Christie won the Republican nomination with 55% of the vote, defeating conservative opponents Steve Lonegan and Rick Merkt.
He then chose Kimberly Guadagno, Monmouth County sheriff, to complete his campaign ticket as a candidate for lieutenant governor.
On November 3, Christie defeated Jon Corzine by a margin of 48.5% to 44.9%, with 5.8% of the vote going to independent candidate Chris Daggett.

Christie took office as Governor of New Jersey on January 19, 2010.
He chose not to move his family into "Drumthwacket", the official governor's mansion, and instead resides in a private Mendham, New Jersey, residence.
On February 9, 2010, he signed Executive Order No.
12, which placed a 90-day freeze on the Council on Affordable Housing (COAH) and established the Housing Opportunity Task Force to examine the State's affordable housing laws, constitutional obligations, and the effectiveness of the current framework.

On February 11, 2010, Christie signed Executive Order No.
14, which declared that a "state of fiscal emergency exists in the State of New Jersey" due to the projected $2.2 billion budget deficit for the current fiscal year (FY 2010).
In a speech before a special joint session of the New Jersey Legislature on the same day, Christie addressed the budget deficit and proposed various fiscal measures to close the gap.
Christie also suspended funding for the Department of the Public Advocate and for the Office of the Child Advocate and called for their elimination.
Some Democrats criticized Christie for not first consulting them on his budget cuts and for circumventing the Legislature's role in the budget process.
In late June 2011, Christie utilized New Jersey's line item veto to eliminate nearly $1 billion from the proposed budget, signing it into law just hours prior to the July 1, 2011, beginning of the state's fiscal year.

On August 25, 2010, the US Department of Health and Human Services announced $400 million in federal Race to the Top education grants to New Jersey would not be funded due to a clerical error in the state's application made by an unidentified mid-level state official.
Christie responded by saying that the Obama administration bureaucracy had overstepped its authority and that the error lay in an administration failure to communicate with the New Jersey government.
However, information later came to light that the issue had already been raised with Christie's Education Commissioner Bret Schundler, and in response Christie had asked for Schundler's resignation; Schundler initially agreed to resign, but the following morning asked to be fired instead, citing his need to claim unemployment benefits.
Schundler maintained that he told Christie the truth and that Christie was misstating what actually occurred.
The New Jersey Education Association rebuked Christie by suggesting that his rejection of a compromise worked out by Schundler with the teachers' union on May 27 was to blame.

During his second year in office, Christie signed into law a payroll tax cut that reduced funding of the Temporary Disability Insurance (TDI) fund by $190 million per year.
Effective for calendar year 2012, the tax cut authorizes the New Jersey Department of Labor and Workforce Development to reduce payroll deduction for most employees from $148 to $61 per year.
The changes took effect on January 1, 2012.
The authorizing legislation was sponsored by Senator Shirley Turner of Lawrenceville.

On January 23, 2012, Christie filed the first nomination to the New Jersey Supreme Court of an openly gay man, Bruce Harris, and an Asian American, Phillip Kwon.
Kwon's nomination was rejected by the Senate Judiciary Committee, the first gubernatorial nominee for the Supreme Court in modern times to fail to be approved.
Two months later, the Senate Judiciary Committee rejected the nomination of Bruce Harris, purportedly on grounds that he lacked courtroom experience.
The partisan impasse over Christie's appointments to fill the vacancies on the New Jersey Supreme Court continues.

On February 17, 2012, he vetoed a bill that would have legalized same sex marriage in New Jersey.
He stated his belief that such a change requires a constitutional amendment and asked the legislature to provide for a referendum on the issue.
He also called for creation of an ombudsman to ensure compliance with the state's existing civil union law.

On September 21, 2012 Governor Christie signed Assembly Bill No.
2647 (A-2647) into law that requires employers to post and distribute notice of employees' rights to gender-equal pay, but vetoed other gender parity bills.
Continuing the tradition of earlier New Jersey governors since the 1980s, Christie traveled to Israel in April 2012.
His itinerary included Jerusalem, Tel Aviv, Tiberias, and the Golan Heights.
During the visit, which included meetings with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and President Shimon Peres, Christie commented that " has never been better or freer than under Israeli control."
Christie subsequently called a helicopter tour of the West Bank "eye-opening", and cautioned against Israeli withdrawal from the West Bank, Jerusalem or the Golan Heights.
The official title given to the trip was "Jersey to Jerusalem Trade Mission: Economic Growth, Diplomacy, Observance".
The visit to Israel was Christie's first official overseas trip since taking office.
From Israel Christie continued with his family to Jordan, as guests of King Abdullah II.
On November 26, 2012, Christie filed papers to run for a second term in office, which would begin in January of 2014.
Christie has received generally favorable public opinion survey ratings during his term in office, as shown by the following examples:For more details on public opinion polls, see Governorship of Chris Christie.
Christie was the subject of ongoing speculation that he would attempt a run for President of the United States in 2012 by competing in the Republican primaries.
He consistently denied any interest in launching a presidential bid.
In September 2011, a number of press stories cited unnamed sources indicating Christie was reconsidering his decision to stay out of the race.
An Associated Press story dated September 30 indicated a decision on whether he would run for president in 2012 would be made "soon".
In a late September speech at the Reagan Library, he had again said he was not a candidate for president, but the speech also coincided with his "reconsideration" of the negative decision.
One commentator at that time reviewed reported support from David H. and Charles G. Koch, Kenneth Langone, and others for Christie's potential candidacy.
Retired GE CEO Jack Welch went on Charlie Rose to articulate his and others' support for a candidacy, and Langone went on the interview show October 4.
On October 4, 2011, Christie acknowledged he had in fact reconsidered his decision but then, again, declined to run.
It was "for real this time", as one report put it.
"Now is not my time," Christie said.
"New Jersey, whether you like it or not, you're stuck with me," Christie added in the one-hour Trenton press conference held to announce the decision.
On October 11, 2011, Christie endorsed Mitt Romney for president.
Some political commentators have questioned whether Christie would be a viable presidential candidate, both for medical and social reasons concerning his size.
One commentator applied the term "extremely obese" to Christie, citing medical guidelines established by the National Institutes of Health.
Christie himself was reportedly concerned about his weight and its implications for his health.
The Obesity Society, a non-profit health policy organization, has challenged this line of thought, releasing a statement asserting that "To suggest that Governor Christie's body weight discounts and discredits his ability to be an effective political candidate is inappropriate, unjust and wrong."

On August 27, 2012, the New York Post reported that according to anonymous sources Christie had not been willing to give up the governorship to be Mitt Romney's running mate because he had doubts about their ability to win.
The Romney campaign was reported to have asked him to resign his governorship if he became the vice-presidential nominee because "pay to play" laws restrict campaign contributions from financial corporation executives to governors running for federal office when the companies do business with the governor's state.
Christie gave the keynote address at the 2012 Republican National Convention.