Schopenhauer's identification of the noumenon with will deserves some explanation.
The noumenon was what Kant called the Ding an Sich, the "Thing in Itself", the reality that exists outside of, and the foundation of, our sensory and mental representations of an external world; in Kantian terms, those sensory and mental representations are mere phenomena.
Schopenhauer's assertion that Will is this noumenon might at first instance strike some as oddly as Heraclitus's revelation that everything is made out of fire.

But Kant's philosophy was formulated as a response to the radical philosophical skepticism of David Hume and his fellow British Empiricists, who claimed that as far as we could tell there was no outside reality beyond our mental representations of it.
When Schopenhauer identifies the noumenon with Will, what he is saying is that we participate in the reality of an otherwise unachievable world outside the mind through Will.
We cannot prove that our mental picture of an outside world corresponds with a reality by reasoning.
Through Will, we know — without thinking &mdash that the world can stimulate us.
We suffer fear, or desire.
These states arise involuntarily.
They arise prior to reflection.
They arise even when the conscious mind would prefer to hold them at bay.
Logic is for Schopenhauer a leaf borne along in a stream of pre-reflective and largely unconscious emotion.
That stream is Will; and through Will, if not through logic, we can participate in the underlying reality that lies beyond mere phenomena.
It is for this reason that Schopenhauer identifies the noumenon with Will.

Schopenhauer begins by arguing that Kant's demarcation between external objects, knowable only as phenomena, and the Thing in Itself of noumenon, contains a significant omission.
There is, in fact, a physical object we know more intimately than we know any object of sense perception.
We know our human bodies have boundaries, and occupy space, the same way other objects known only through our named senses do.
Though we seldom think of our bodies as "physical objects," we know even before reflection that it shares some of their properties.
We understand that a watermelon cannot successfully occupy the same space as an oncoming truck.
We know that were we to repeat the experiment with our own bodies, similar results would obtain.
We know this even if we do not understand the physics involved.

We know that our consciousness inhabits a physical body, similar to other physical objects only known as phenomena.
Yet, our consciousness is not commensurate with our body.
Most of us possess the power of voluntary motion.
We usually are not aware of our lungs' breath, or our heartbeat, unless our attention is called to it.
Our ability to control either is limited.
Our kidneys command our attention on their schedule rather than one we choose.
Few of us have any idea what our livers are doing right now, though this organ is as needful as lungs, heart, kidneys, and liver.
The conscious mind is the servant, not the master, of these organs; these organs have an agenda which the conscious mind did not choose, and has limited power over.

For Schopenhauer, the aesthetic viewpoint is more objective than the scientific viewpoint precisely because it separates the intellect from the will in the form of art.
The ability to view nature aesthetically is a telltale sign of a genius.
An important metaphysical distinction that Schopenhauer makes involves the notion of the will versus art.
In a sense, Schopenhauer claimed that the body is an extension of the will, while art is a spontaneous act which cannot be linked to either the body or the intellect.
The intellect for Schopenhauer allows man to suffer because it brings the suffering of the world into a more vivid consciousness.
Logically speaking then, the genius suffers the most because he in effect has the most intellect.

Aesthetic contemplation for Schopenhauer translates into an immediate objectification of the will.
He employs a Platonic allegory to demonstrate that all existence is ultimately futile since it can be fundamentally characterized by a want of satisfaction that can never be attained.
This want is otherwise known as happiness.
Schopenhauer's metaphysics is said by many to be essentially marked by an all-encompassing pessimism.
This pessimism serves as a stark contrast to Schopenhauer's Romantic contemporaries in 19th century Germany.
His contemporaries, who include Goethe, Hegel, and Schelling, all tended to employ a wide-ranging optimism concerning the seemingly progressive history of mankind.

Other notable ideas pertaining to Schopenhauer's metaphysics entail the notion of how art is conceived.
Schopenhauer argued that art was a spontaneous, pre-determined Idea which that artist had in mind before he even attempted to create.
Art therefore placed man above science and ultimately nature since it effectively goes beyond the realm of sufficient reason.
Science for Schopenhauer shall be relegated to the boundaries of reason and thus the genius is precluded from entering its territory.
Moreover, philosophy is not necessarily a pursuit of wisdom but rather it can be viewed as a means for interpreting the personal experiences of one's own life.
Schopenhauer maintained that desire produces pain and thus one ought to be wary of hedonism.

Schopenhauer had a notably strained relationship with his mother Johanna Schopenhauer.
After his father's death, Arthur Schopenhauer endured two long years of drudgery as a merchant, in honor of his dead father.
Afterwards, his mother retired to Weimar, and Arthur dedicated himself wholly to studies in the gymnasium of Gotha.
After he left it in disgust after seeing one of the masters lampooned, he went to live with his mother.
But by that time she had already opened her infamous salon, and Arthur was not compatible with the vain, ceremonious ways of the salon.
He was also disgusted by the ease with which Johanna had forgotten his father's memory.
Therefore, he gave university life a shot.
There, he wrote his first book, The Fourfold Boot of the Principle of Sufficient Season.
She informed him that the book was incomprehensible and it was unlikely that anyone would ever buy a copy.
In a fit of temper Arthur told her that his work would be read long after the rubbish she wrote would have been totally forgotten.
He then went on to prove the veracity of this statement.
Along with the book he had written by that time, his masterpiece, The World as Will and Representation, 1819 and his later works such as Parerga und Paralipomena, 1851, have become classics in philosophic literature.
Scarcely anyone in our own times has read the novels nor even heard of his mother, Johanna Schopenhauer.
Later on, Johanna and her daughter would fritter away their share of Heinrich's hard-earned money.
However, Arthur avoided this kind of financial ruin.

According to Schopenhauer, whenever we make a choice, "we assume as necessary that that decision was preceded by something from which it ensued, and which we call the ground or reason, or more accurately the motive, of the resultant action."
Choices are not made freely.
Our actions are necessary and determined because "every human being, even every animal, after the motive has appeared, must carry out the action which alone is in accordance with his inborn and immutable character."
A definite action inevitably results when a particular motive influences a person's given, unchangeable character.
Should crimes, then, be punished?

The State, Schopenhauer claimed, punishes criminals in order to prevent future crimes.
It does so by placing "beside every possible motive for committing a wrong a more powerful motive for leaving it undone, in the inescapable punishment.
Accordingly, the criminal code is as complete a register as possible of counter–motives to all criminal actions that can possibly be imagined…."

Should capital punishment be legal?
"For safeguarding the lives of citizens," he asserted, "capital punishment is therefore absolutely necessary."
"The murderer," wrote Schopenhauer, " who is condemned to death according to the law must, it is true, be now used as a mere means, and with complete right.
For public security, which is the principal object of the State, is disturbed by him; indeed it is abolished if the law remains unfulfilled.
The murderer, his life, his person, must be the means of fulfilling the law, and thus of re–establishing public security."

People cannot be improved.
They can only be influenced by strong motives that overpower criminal motives.
Schopenhauer declared that "real moral reform is not at all possible, but only determent from the deed…."

He claimed that this doctrine was not original with him.
Previously, it appeared in the writings of Plato , Seneca, Thomas Hobbes, Pufendorf, and Anselm Feuerbach.
Schopenhauer declared that their teaching was corrupted by subsequent errors and therefore was in need of clarification.