The Republic of Albania is a country in southeastern Europe.
It is bordered by Yugoslavia in the north, Macedonia in the east, and Greece in the south, and has a coast on the Adriatic Sea in the west.
Main article: History of Albania

Until 1990, fives years after the death of Hoxha, Albania was an isolationist state.
A multi-party democracy is emerging, but the country suffers from economic problems, organised crime, and a large number of Albanian refugees from Kosovo.
Main article: Politics of Albania

Head of state is the president, which is elected by the Kuvendi Popullor, or People's Assembly.
The main part of the Assembly's 155 members are elected by the Albanians in elections every 5 years.
The president is assisted by a council of ministers, which is appointed by the president.
Main article: Districts of Albania

Albania is divided into 36 districts, or rrethe.
The capital city, Tirana, has a special status.
The districts are:

Most of the population (95%) is Albanian, but there is a sizeable Greek minority.
Many ethnic Albanians also live in bordering Kosovo.
The language is Albanian, although some Greek is also spoken.

Since the occupation by the Ottomans, the majority of the Albanians has been muslim, even though relgion was prohibited during the communist era.
The Eastern Orthodox and Catholic Church are the other main religions in Albania.
Main article: Culture of Albania

One of the first written evidences of the use of the word " Albanoi " as the name of an Illyrian tribe in what is now north-central Albania goes back to the 130 A.D., in a work of Tolomeo.
Albanopolis of the Albani, a place located on the map of Ptolemy (3.12.20) and also named on aancient family epitaph at Scupi, which has been indetufied with the Zgërdhesh hill-fort near Kruja in northern Albania.
Moreover, Arbanon is just likely to be the name of a district - the plain of the Mat has been suggested - rather than particular place.
Anindication of movement from higher altitudes in a much earlier period has been detected in the distribution of place-names ending in -esh that appears to derive from the latin -enisis or -esis, between the Shkumbin and the Mat, with a concentration between Elbasan and Kruja.
The term Albanoi may have been slowly spread to other Illyrian tribes until its usage became universal among all the Albanian people.
According to the Albanian scholar Konitza, the term "Albania" did not displace "Illyria" completely until the end of the fourteenth century.
The "Alba" or "Arba" seam to be connected with the twon "Arba" (modern Rab, Croatia), in the prehistoric times inhabited by the Illyrian Liburnians.
First mentioned in 360 BC.
The root of the name comes from Illyrian "Arb" (dark, green, wooded) and is simply transposed into antique names of Arba, Arva, Arbia which are mentioned by the cosmographers of the time.

Approximately a millennium after, some Byzantine writers use the words “Albanon” and “Arbanon” to indicate the region of Kruja.
Under the Angiò, in the XIII century, the names “Albania “and “Albanenses” indicate the whole country and all the population, as it is demonstrated by the works of many ancient Albanian writers such as Budi, Blanco and Bogdano.
We first learn of Albanians in their native land as the Arbanites of Arbanon in Anna Commenas account (Alexiad 4) of the troubles in that region caused in the reign of her father Alexius I Comneus (1081- 1118) by the Normans.
In ‘History’ written in 1079-1080, Byzantine historian Michael Attaliates was first to refer to the Albanoi as having taken part in a revolt against Constantinople in 1043 and to the Arbanitai as subjects of the duke of Dyrrachium.
The Italo-Albanians and the Albanian minorities( still present in Greece) have been called in different ways with the passing of the years: Arbënuer, Arbënor, Arbëneshë, Arbreshë.
There seems to be no doubt that the root Alb- or Arb- is earlier than Shqip-, from which the modern name of the state (Shqipëria) derives, a name which appears only in the time of the Turkish invasions.
The Albanian name of the country, Shqipëria, translates into English as Land of the Eagles, hence the two-headed bird on the national flag and emblem, and because of the large presence of these animals in the mountainous zones of Albania.

The Illyrian kingdom of Bardhyllus ( In Albanian means 'White Star').
Became a formidable local power in the fourth century B.C.
In 358 B.C., however, Macedonia's Philip II, father of Alexander the Great, defeated the Illyrians and assumed control of their territory as far as Lake Ohrid.
Alexander himself routed the forces of the Illyrian chieftain Clitus in 335 B.C., and Illyrian tribal leaders and soldiers accompanied Alexander on his conquest of Persia.
After Alexander's death in 323 B.C., independent Illyrian kingdoms again arose.
In 312 B.C., King Glaucius expelled the Greeks from Durrës.
By the end of the third century, an Illyrian kingdom based near what is now the Albanian city of Shkodër controlled parts of northern Albania, Montenegro, and Hercegovina.
Under Queen Teuta, Illyrians attacked Roman merchant vessels plying the Adriatic Sea and gave Rome an excuse to invade the Balkans.

In the Illyrian Wars of 229 and 219 B.C., Rome overran the Illyrian settlements in the Neretva River valley.
The Romans made new gains in 168 B.C., and Roman forces captured Illyria's King Gentius at Shkodër, which they called Scodra, and brought him to Rome in 165 B.C. A century later, Julius Caesar and his rival Pompey fought their decisive battle near Durrës (Dyrrachium).
Rome finally subjugated recalcitrant Illyrian tribes in the western Balkans dwing the region of Emperor Tiberius in A.D. 9.
The Romans divided the lands that make up present-day Albania among the provinces of Macedonia, Dalmatia, and Epirus.

For about four centuries, Roman rule brought the Illyrian-populated lands economic and cultural advancement and ended most of the enervating clashes among local tribes.
The Illyrian mountain clansmen retained local authority but pledged allegiance to the emperor and acknowledged the authority of his envoys.
During a yearly holiday honoring the Caesars, the Illyrian mountaineers swore loyalty to the emperor and reaffirmed their political rights.
A form of this tradition, known as the kuvend, has survived to the present day in northern Albania.

The Romans established numerous military camps and colonies and completely latinized the coastal cities.
They also oversaw the construction of aqueducts and roads, including the Via Egnatia, a famous military highway and trade route that led from Durrës through the Shkumbin River valley to Macedonia and Byzantium (later Constantinople --see Glossary).
Copper, asphalt, and silver were extracted from the mountains.
The main exports were wine, cheese, oil, and fish from Lake Scutari and Lake Ohrid.
Imports included tools, metalware, luxury goods, and other manufactured articles.
Apollonia became a cultural center, and Julius Caesar himself sent his nephew, later the Emperor Augustus, to study there.

Illyrians distinguished themselves as warriors in the Roman legions and made up a significant portion of the Praetorian Guard.
Several of the Roman emperors were of Illyrian origin, including Diocletian (284-305), who saved the empire from disintegration by introducing institutional reforms, and Constantine the Great (324-37)--who accepted Christianity and transferred the empire's capital from Rome to Byzantium, which he called Constantinople.
Emperor Justinian (527-65)--who codified Roman law, built the most famous Byzantine church, the Hagia Sofia, and reextended the empire's control over lost territories- -was probably also an Illyrian.

Christianity came to the Illyrian-populated lands in the first century A.D. Saint Paul wrote that he preached in the Roman province of Illyricum, and legend holds that he visited Durrës.
When the Roman Empire was divided into eastern and western halves in A.D. 395, the lands that now make up Albania were administered by the Eastern Empire but were ecclesiastically dependent on Rome.
In A.D. 732, however, a Byzantine emperor, Leo the Isaurian, subordinated the area to the patriarchate of Constantinople.
For centuries thereafter, the Albanian lands became an arena for the ecclesiastical struggle between Rome and Constantinople.
Most Albanians living in the mountainous north became Roman Catholic, while in the southern and central regions, the majority became Orthodox.

The fall of the Roman Empire and the age of great migrations brought radical changes to the Balkan Peninsula and the Illyrian people.
Barbarian tribesmen overran many rich Roman cities, destroying the existing social and economic order and leaving the great Roman aqueducts, coliseums, temples, and roads in ruins.
The Illyrians gradually disappeared as a distinct people from the Balkans, replaced by the Bulgars, Serbs, Croats, and Albanians.
In the late Middle Ages, new waves of invaders swept over the Albanian-populated lands.
Thanks to their protective mountains, close-knit tribal society, and sheer pertinacity, however, the Albanian people developed their distinctive identity and language.

In the fourth century, barbarian tribes began to prey upon the Roman Empire, and the fortunes of the Illyrian-populated lands sagged.
The Germanic Goths and Asiatic Huns were the first to arrive, invading in mid-century; the Avars attacked in A.D. 570; and the Slavic Serbs and Croats overran Illyrian-populated areas in the early seventh century.
About fifty years later, the Bulgars conquered much of the Balkan Peninsula and extended their domain to the lowlands of what is now central Albania.
Many Illyrians fled from coastal areas to the mountains, exchanging a sedentary peasant existence for the itinerant life of the herdsman.
Other Illyrians intermarried with the conquerors and eventually assimilated.
In general, the invaders destroyed or weakened Roman and Byzantine cultural centers in the lands that would become Albania.

Again during the late medieval period, invaders ravaged the Illyrian-inhabited regions of the Balkans.
Norman, Venetian, and Byzantine fleets attacked by sea.
Bulgar, Serb, and Byzantine forces came overland and held the region in their grip for years.
Clashes between rival clans and intrusions by the Serbs produced hardship that triggered an exodus from the region southward into Greece, including Thessaly, the Peloponnese, and the Aegean Islands.
The invaders assimilated much of the Illyrian population, but the Illyrians living in lands that comprise modern-day Albania and parts of Yugoslavia (see Glossary) and Greece were never completely absorbed or even controlled.

The Serbs occupied parts of northern and eastern Albania toward the end of the twelfth century.
In 1204, after Western crusaders sacked Constantinople, Venice won nominal control over Albania and the Epirus region of northern Greece and took possession of Durrës.
A prince from the overthrown Byzantine ruling family, Michael Comnenus, made alliances with Albanian chiefs and drove the Venetians from lands that now make up southern Albania and northern Greece, and in 1204 he set up an independent principality, the Despotate of Epirus, with Janina (now Ioannina in northwest Greece) as its capital.
In 1272 the king of Naples, Charles I of Anjou, occupied Durrës and formed an Albanian kingdom that would last for a century.
Internal power struggles further weakened the Byzantine Empire in the fourteenth century, enabling the Serbs' most powerful medieval ruler, Stefan Dusan, to establish a short-lived empire that included all of Albania except Durrës.

The Ottoman Turks expanded their empire from Anatolia to the Balkans in the fourteenth century.
They crossed the Bosporus in 1352, and in 1389 they crushed a Serb-led army that included Albanian forces at Kosovo Polje, located in the southern part of present-day Yugoslavia.
Europe gained a brief respite from Ottoman pressure in 1402 when the Mongol leader, Tamerlane, attacked Anatolia from the east, killed the Turks' absolute ruler, the sultan, and sparked a civil war.
When order was restored, the Ottomans renewed their westward progress.
In 1453 Sultan Mehmed II's forces overran Constantinople and killed the last Byzantine emperor.

The division of the Albanian-populated lands into small, quarreling fiefdoms ruled by independent feudal lords and tribal chiefs made them easy prey for the Ottoman armies.
In 1385 the Albanian ruler of Durrës, Karl Thopia, appealed to the sultan for support against his rivals, the Balsha family.
An Ottoman force quickly marched into Albania along the Via Egnatia and routed the Balshas.
The principal Albanian clans soon swore fealty to the Turks.
Sultan Murad II launched the major Ottoman onslaught in the Balkans in 1423, and the Turks took Janina in 1431 and Arta on the Ionian coast, in 1449.
The Turks allowed conquered Albanian clan chiefs to maintain their positions and property, but they had to pay tribute, send their sons to the Turkish court as hostages, and provide the Ottoman army with auxiliary troops.

The Albanians' resistance to the Turks in the mid-fifteenth century won them acclaim all over Europe.
Gjon Kastrioti of Krujë was one of the Albanian clan leaders who submitted to Turkish suzerainty.
He was compelled to send his four sons to the Ottoman capital to be trained for military service.
The youngest, Gjergj Kastrioti (1403-68), who would become the Albanians' greatest national hero, captured the sultan's attention.
Renamed Iskanderbey (means Lord Alexandre) when he converted to Islam, the young man participated in military expeditions to Asia Minor and Europe.
When appointed to administer a Balkan district, Iskander became known as Skanderbeg.
After Ottoman forces under Skanderbeg's command suffered defeat in a battle near Nis, in present-day Serbia, in 1443, the Albanian rushed to Krujë and tricked a Turkish pasha into surrendering him the Kastrioti family fortress.
Skanderbeg then reembraced Roman Catholicism and declared a holy war against the Turks.

On March 1, 1444, Albanian chieftains gathered in the cathedral of Lezhë with the prince of Montenegro and delegates from Venice and proclaimed Skanderbeg commander of the Albanian resistance.
All of Albania, including most of Epirus, accepted his leadership against the Ottoman Turks, but local leaders kept control of their own districts.
Under a red flag bearing Skanderbeg's heraldic emblem, an Albanian force of about 30,000 men held off brutal Ottoman campaigns against their lands for twenty-four years.
Twice the Albanians overcame sieges of Krujë.
In 1449 the Albanians routed Sultan Murad II himself.
Later, they repulsed attacks led by Sultan Mehmed II.
In 1461 Skanderbeg went to the aid of his suzerain, King Alfonso I of <"http://worldfacts.us/Italy-Naples.htm">Naples, against the kings of Sicily.
The government under Skanderbeg was unstable, however, and at times local Albanian rulers cooperated with the Ottoman Turks against him.
When Skanderbeg died at Lezhë, the sultan reportedly cried out, "Asia and Europe are mine at last.
Woe to Christendom!
She has lost her sword and shield."

With support from Naples and the Vatican, resistance to the Ottoman Empire continued mostly in Albania's highlands, where the chieftains even opposed the construction of roads out of fear that they would bring Ottoman soldiers and tax collectors.
The Albanians' fractured leadership, however, failed to halt the Ottoman onslaught.
Krujë fell to the Ottoman Turks in 1478; Shkodër succumbed in 1479 after a fifteen-month siege; and the Venetians evacuated Durrës in 1501.
The defeats triggered a great Albanian exodus to southern Italy, especially to the kingdom of Naples, as well as to Sicily, Greece, Romania, and Egypt.
Most of the Albanian refugees belonged to the Orthodox Church.
Some of the émigrés to Italy converted to Roman Catholicism, and the rest established a Uniate Church (see Glossary).
The Albanians of Italy significantly influenced the Albanian national movement in future centuries, and Albanian Franciscan priests, most of whom were descended from émigrés to Italy, played a significant role in the preservation of Catholicism in Albania's northern regions.

The Ottoman sultan considered himself God's agent on earth, the leader of a religious--not a national--state whose purpose was to defend and propagate Islam.
Non-Muslims paid extra taxes and held an inferior status, but they could retain their old religion and a large measure of local autonomy.
By converting to Islam, individuals among the conquered could elevate themselves to the privileged stratum of society.
In the early years of the empire, all Ottoman high officials were the sultan's bondsmen the children of Christian subjects chosen in childhood for their promise, converted to Islam, and educated to serve.
Some were selected from prisoners of war, others sent as gifts, and still others obtained through devshirme, the tribute of children levied in the Ottoman Empire's Balkan lands.
Many of the best fighters in the sultan's elite guard, the janissaries (see Glossary), were conscripted as young boys from Christian Albanian families.
The Ottoman Turks divided the Albanian-inhabited lands among a number of districts, or vilayets.
The Ottoman authorities did not initially stress conversion to Islam.
In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, however, economic pressures and coercion produced the conversion of about two-thirds of the empire's Albanians.

The Ottoman Turks first focused their conversion campaigns on the Roman Catholic Albanians of the north and then on the Orthodox population of the south.
For example, the authorities increased taxes, especially poll taxes, to make conversion economically attractive.
During and after a Christian counteroffensive against the Ottoman Empire from 1687 to 1690, when Albanian Catholics revolted against their Muslim overlords, the Ottoman pasha of Pec, a town in the south of present-day Yugoslavia, retaliated by forcing entire Albanian villages to accept Islam.
Albanian beys then moved from the northern mountains to the fertile lands of Kosovo, which had been abandoned by thousands of Orthodox Serbs fearing reprisals for their collaboration with the Christian forces.

Most of the conversion's to Islam took place in the lowlands of the Shkumbin River valley, where the Ottoman Turks could easily apply pressure because of the area's accessibility.
Many Albanians, however, converted in name only and secretly continued to practice Christianity.
Often one branch of a family became Muslim while another remained Christian, and many times these families celebrated their respective religious holidays together

As early as the eighteenth century, a mystic Islamic sect, the Bektashi dervishes, spread into the empire's Albanian-populated lands.
Probably founded in the late thirteenth century in Anatolia, Bektashism became the janissaries' official faith in the late sixteenth century.
The Bektashi sect contains features of the Turks' pre-Islamic religion and emphasizes man as an individual.
Women, unveiled, participate in Bektashi ceremonies on an equal basis, and the celebrants use wine despite the ban on alcohol in the Quran.
The Bektashis became the largest religious group in southern Albania after the sultan disbanded the janissaries in 1826.
Bektashi leaders played key roles in the Albanian nationalist movement of the late nineteenth century and were to a great degree responsible for the Albanians' traditional tolerance of religious differences.

During the centuries of Ottoman rule, the Albanian lands remained one of Europe's most backward areas.
In the mountains north of the Shkumbin River, Geg herders maintained their self-governing society comprised of clans.
An association of clans was called a bajrak, (see Glossary).
Taxes on the northern tribes were difficult if not impossible for the Ottomans to collect because of the rough terrain and fierceness of the Albanian highlanders.
Some mountain tribes succeeded in defending their independence through the centuries of Ottoman rule, engaging in intermittent guerrilla warfare with the Ottoman Turks, who never deemed it worthwhile to subjugate them.
Until recent times, Geg clan chiefs, or bajraktars, exercised patriarchal powers, arranged marriages, mediated quarrels, and meted out punishments.
The tribesmen of the northern Albanian mountains recognized no law but the Code of Lek, a collection of tribal laws transcribed in the fourteenth century by a Roman Catholic priest.
The code regulates a variety of subjects, including blood vengeance.
Even today, many Albanian highlanders regard the canon as the supreme law of the land.

South of the Shkumbin River, the mostly peasant Tosks lived in compact villages under elected rulers.
Some Tosks living in settlements high in the mountains maintained their independence and often escaped payment of taxes.
The Tosks of the lowlands, however, were easy for the Ottoman authorities to control.
The Albanian tribal system disappeared there, and the Ottomans imposed a system of military fiefs under which the sultan granted soldiers and cavalrymen temporary landholdings, or timars, in exchange for military service.
By the eighteenth century, many military fiefs had effectively become the hereditary landholdings of economically and politically powerful families who squeezed wealth from their hard-strapped Christian and Muslim tenant farmers.
The beys, like the clan chiefs of the northern mountains, became virtually independent rulers in their own provinces, had their own military contingents, and often waged war against each other to increase their landholdings and power.
The Sublime Porte (see Glossary) attempted to press a divide-and-rule policy to keep the local beys from uniting and posing a threat to Ottoman rule itself, but with little success.

By the 1870s, the Sublime Porte's reforms aimed at checking the Ottoman Empire's disintegration had clearly failed.
The image of the "Turkish yoke" had become fixed in the nationalist mythologies and psyches of the empire's Balkan peoples, and their march toward independence quickened.
The Albanians, because of the preponderance of Muslims link with Islam and their internal social divisions, were the last of the Balkan peoples to develop a national consciousness, which was triggered by fears that the Ottoman Empire would lose its Albanian-populated lands to the emerging Balkan states--Serbia, Montenegro, Bulgaria, and Greece.
Albanian leaders formed the Prizren League in 1878, which pressed for territorial autonomy, and after decades of unrest a major uprising exploded in the Albanian-populated Ottoman territories in 1912, on the eve of the First Balkan War.
When Serbia, Montenegro, and Greece laid claim to Albanian lands during the war, the Albanians declared independence, and the European Great Powers endorsed an independent Albania in 1913, after the Second Balkan War.
The young state, however, collapsed within weeks of the outbreak of World War I.

One of the first written evidences of the use of the word "Albanoi" as the name of an Illyrian tribe in what is now north-central Albania goes back to the 130 A.D., in a work of Claudius Ptolemaeus (Ptolemy).
Albanopolis of the Albani is a place located on the map of Ptolemy and also named on an ancient family epitaph at Scupi, which has been identified with the Zgërdhesh hill-fort near Kruja in northern Albania.
Arbanon is likely to be the name of a district - the plain of the Mat has been suggested - rather than particular place.
An indication of movement from higher altitudes in a much earlier period has been detected in the distribution of place-names ending in -esh that appears to derive from the latin -enisis or -esis, between the Shkumbin and the Mat, with a concentration between Elbasan and Kruja.

The term Albanoi may have been slowly spread to other Illyrian tribes until its usage became universal among all the Albanian people.
According to the Albanian scholar Faïk bey Konitza, the term "Albania" did not displace "Illyria" completely until the end of the fourteenth century.
The word "Alba" or "Arba" seems to be connected with the town Arba (modern Rab, Croatia), in prehistoric times inhabited by the Illyrian Liburnians, first mentioned in 360 BC.
The root of the name comes from Illyrian Arber or Arbën (Ar = Soil, Bër/Bën = To do, to work on) and is found in the ancient names Arba, Arva, Arbia mentioned by the cartographers of the time.
Thus the name Arber or Arben, sinonimous for Albanians, means "they who work on soil.
"Ara" is "Soil" and the ancient name of the Aryans.

The communists took over after World War II, in November 1944, under the leader of the resistance, Enver Hoxha.
From 1945 until 1990 Albania had one of the most repressive governments in Europe.
The communist party was created in 1941 with the direction of Bolshevik Communist Parties.
All those who opposed it were eliminated.
Enver Hoxha became the leader of this party.
For many decades of his domination, Hoxha created and destroyed relationships with Belgrade, Moscow, and China, always in his personal interests.
The country was isolated, first from the West (Western Europe, Canada, USA) and later even from the communist East.

Money for imports comes from financial aid and from the money that refugees working abroad bring to Albania.
This is a good status quo business for both Greece and Italy.
EU.

Albania has coastline on two of Europe's seas: the Ionian Sea and the Adriatic Sea.
The Ionian Sea is known for clean, clear water and forms the south-west coast of Albania.
It starts from Vlora and goes south as far as the border with Greece.
From 1990 to 200, the country was going through political, economic, and social upheaval.
However, since 2000 the country of Albania has had improving employment and decreasing corruption.
These changes have increased tourism.
The Adriatic Sea forms the Albanian coastline from middle-Albania to Monte Negro.
The Adriatic sea is famous throughout the Balkans for its rich, sandy beaches.
The Adriatic coastline starts from the city of Albania Vlora and ends at the border with Monte Negro, a stretch of around 770km (480 miles).
One of the best beaches on the Adriatic Sea is the beach of DIVJAKA.

DIVJAKA BEACH, locally known as the "ilac," is still one of the beauties of Albania.
This beach is used mostly by local residents and a few tourists.
It is about 20km long.
Main article: Demographics of Albania

The language is Albanian, although Greek is also spoken by the Greek minority in the south regions of the country.
In the area of Gorë in the Kukës district is spoken a Slavic language called Gorani.
This is the only area in the world where this language is spoken.
The village of Shishtavec is the main centre of Gorani language.

Since the occupation by the Ottomans, the majority of Albanians have been Muslim (70%), even though religion was prohibited during the communist era.
The Eastern Orthodox (20%) and Catholic Church (10%) (Note: Percentages are estimates, no available statistics) are the other main religions in Albania, though in Albania religious fanaticism has never been a serious problem with people from different religions living in peace and even getting married without any problem.
20 % of total Muslim population is Bektashi, people who follow a faith originating in the Turkish migrations into Turkey, and came to Albania through the Ottoman Janissaries.
It has outwardly Shi'ite Islamic elements, but is really a Shamanic-Pantheistic faith.
The main prophet of Alevism is Haxhi Bektash Veliu, and it is currently headed by Baba Flamur Shkalla, the successor of Baba Rexhep, based in Madison, USA.
Main article: Culture of Albania Main article: Demographics of Albania

The language is Albanian, although some Greek is also spoken in some small villages of south bordering Greece.
In the area of Gorë in the Kukës district is spoken a Slavic language called Gorani.
This is the only area in the world where this language is spoken.
The village of Shishtavec is the main centre of Gorani language.

Since the occupation by the Ottomans, the majority of Albanians have been Muslim (70%), even though religion was prohibited during the communist era.
The Eastern Orthodox (20%) and Catholic Church (10%) (Note: Percentages are estimates, no available statistics) are the other main religions in Albania, though in Albania religious fanaticism has never been a serious problem with people from different religions living in peace and even getting married without any problem.
The majority of the south of Albania is Alevi-Bektashi, people who follow a faith originating in the Turkish migrations into Turkey, and came to Albania through the Ottoman Janissaries.
It has outwardly Shi'ite Islamic elements, but is really a Shamanic-Pantheistic faith.
The main prophet of Alevism is Haxhi Bektash Veliu, and it is currently headed by Baba Flamur Shkalla, the successor of Baba Rexhep, based in Madison, USA.
Main article: Culture of Albania

History or tradition has it that two brothers named Tosk and Gheg, who lived in times long gone, established their families and spread to what are now recognized as two regions, Tosk-south and Gheg-north.
This is symbolically shown in the Albanian national flag by the two headed-eagle.
Travelling South to North via the national road you may soon note that people’s attire will gradually vary.
A good example of this are the villagers who have kept the old traditions and costume, unlike urban dwellers who strive to globalization.
Thus, the traditional dress is still common in rural areas especially noticeable during holidays or as carried by old people.
Men wear embroidered white shirts and knee trousers, the Ghegs with a white felt skullcap and the Tosks with flat-topped white fezzes.
Along with the standard white blouses with wide sleeves, women from Christian areas wear red vests, while Muslim women wear loose pants tied at the ankles and coloured headscarves.
Older Muslim women wear white scarves around the neck.

Speaking about customs or creeds, we can’t help but mention the Kanun code of behaviour.
This or other counterpart laws, coming through ages from the post Scanderberg area, used to be a strong tradition in south and north alike.
Kanun law came to be set up as an alternative answer of the people who deprived of a proper Albanian rule, and reluctant to accept a foreign one, created their own.
As a phenomenon it is not unknown in other parts of Europe, but when in these countries you can now only read about such things as blood feuds in history books, in Albania it is a painful bizarre reality of everyday life.
This law is alive and strong only in the North, where honour is "not a breath of air".
There we can still see locked behind the bars of the straight kullas whole families who stay there for fear that their beloved may be killed.

It is a common view that Albanians have a strong tradition of hospitality.
If you are hospitable and respect your guest than you have a "white" heart, which stands as the Albanian version for the English "golden heart" or being generous in spite of life conditions.
By way of illustration we could mention the famous expression of the "bread, salt and good heart".
It means that there is always an open door and a hearth offered with sincerity.
Albanians can be described as loyal, strong and friendly although it takes some time to really know them.
They maintain strong family ties and have a special feeling for home like people anywhere in the Balkans generally do.