Another type of telescope to consider, especially if the amateur is observing with children, is a wide field telescope.
This type of telescope has an aperature of only 4 and a half inches, but is easier to target an object and with higher power lenses, the amateur can zoom in on planets and some of the closer DSOs.
It is the best of a blend of a telescope and a pair of binoculars, which tend to have a wider field of view than most telescopes.
With any telescope, though, the mount is the most important feature.
A tripod that doesn't shake every time one uses it is a must.
Too many amateur astronomers give up because they have a hard time targeting an object.
If the mounting tripod is rock solid, the amateur can enjoy their time observing the heavens instead of fighting with the telescope.

The next step in an amateur astronomers quest for more space adventure comes with the purchase of a good camera for Astrophotography.
Starting out with a good 35 mm camera with a 50 mm lens mounted on a tripod and using a cable release and 400 or faster speed film, the amateur can capture some nice pictures of the planets and some larger nebula, like the Great nebula in Orion.
Some of the larger comets and prolific meteor showers can be photographed this way as well.
As one progresses, cameras can be mounted directly on to telescopes, capturing on film many DSOs.
Special films and even the technique of hypering the film has been employed by the amateur.
Many publications accept these astrophotos in their magazines, ie.
Astronomy Magazine.

Some good books for amateur astronomers to start with:Telescopes come in many shapes and sizes, both commercial and home-built, and the preferences of people who use them often differ.
Some amateur astronomers prefer to learn the sky as accurately as they can, using maps to find their way between the stars.
In this case a common approach is to use binoculars or a manually driven telescope, combined with star maps, to locate items of interest in the sky.
The normal technique for doing this, by locating landmark stars and "hopping" between them, is called star hopping.
More recently as technology has improved and prices have come down, automated "GOTO" telescopes have also become a popular choice.
With these computer-driven telescopes, the user typically enters the name of the item they wish to look at, and the telescope finds it in the sky automatically with comparatively little further effort required by the user.
The main advantage of a "GOTO" telescope for an experienced amateur astronomer is the reduction of "wasted" time that may have otherwise been used in trying to find a particular object.
This time can therefore be used more effectively for studying the object.

There is significant (though usually light-hearted) debate within the hobby about which method is better.
Promoters of the star hopping approach for finding items in the sky usually argue that they know the sky much better as a result.
The manual method also tends to require simpler equipment with less calibration and overhead setup time, which tends to be more versatile.
On the other hand, promoters of "GOTO" telescopes often argue that they are more interested in studying objects, and the reward of finding them or learning exactly where they are is not as important to them.

Telescopes come in many shapes and sizes, both commercial and home-built, and the preferences of people who use them often differ.

There are a many ways for people to become involved in amateur astronomy and study the night sky.
One option is to join a local astronomical society, the members of which will often be very happy to help a newcomer take a more active part.
Some people also prefer to simply teach themselves, in which case there are likely to be a large amount of books in the local library.

Common objects that are observed early are the Moon and planets.
Another thing that most newcomers to amateur astronomy become acquainted with are the more prominent constellations in the night sky.
When reading maps and interpreting instructions for future star hopping, constellations are good starting points for identifying locations in the night sky.
They are frequently referred to by amateur astronomers when discussing the location of items of interest when looked at with binoculars and telescopes.
An relatively new type of beginning amateur astronomer, brought about by the reduction in price of relatively powerful "GOTO" telescopes, is one who begins with such a telescope.
It is possible for an inexperienced person to immediately look at a large amount of deep sky objects in the night sky without necessarily having any prior experience or training.

There is currently some debate among many amateur astronomers about the merits of this approach to becoming involved in the hoppy, and the effects that low-priced GOTO telescopes may be having.
On one hand, amateur astronomy is being exposed to more people.
On the other hand, some argue that there may be evidence that those who initially purchase powerful automated telescopes could become bored very quickly.

Sunspots and solar eclipses can be viewed during the day using a telescope or binoculars fitted with approved safety filters.
Extreme caution must be exercised to avoid permanent blindness.
Some solar filters supplied with cheaper telescopes are not safe enough, use only filters clearly identified as complying with current safety standards.
and  Sun spots are difficult to see with the naked eye.
They are effectively solar disturbances on the sun's surface and can change over time as conditions within the sun change, somewhat like storms on the sun.
By observing the sun over time the appearance of sun spots changes due to both the sun's rotation and each storm's evolution.

Looking directly at the sun during the day can be very damaging for your eyes.
Not even sunglasses will prevent eye damage, so special filtered glasses fitted with materials such as metallized PET film are essential.
These can also be used to observe solar eclipses.
However, sun spots can be seen safely when there is a sufficient level of fog or cloud.
Projecting an image of the sun on to a surface using a piece of card with a pinhole can also be very effective, and safe.

Aurora is a typical skywatching activity especially at higher magnetic latitudes.
Comets can be easy to locate and photograph and an excellent reason to skywatch.
Phenomena linked to the Sun and Moon: Other interesting observations in relation to the Sun and Moon (even Venus at times) can be made, although their observation depends on the particular atmospheric conditions.
These can be easier to observe since they do not always require any eye protection.
If you have a good view, don't hesitate to you start the conquest of the sky.

The queen of the night - its observation by the naked eye permits us to approach our only natural satellite and to understand the alterations that affect it better.
Of different and darker composition than the rest of the surface, the maria (singular "mare", Latin for sea) are composed of basalt.
These flat areas of ancient frozen lava form the familiar pattern of dark spots which can be seen with the naked eye.
They are given the names of fanciful bodies of water since early observers believed them to be literal seas.
Charts of the Moon are available to aid the observer in identifying Lunar features.

As the night passes, a viewer will notice some stars move more quickly than others.
They are actually planets.
To distinguish a planet from a star, it is necessary to know that the stars flutter and the planets little, because of the a lot more important distance that separates us of the first.
Once you found a planet, it is not uninteresting knowing about what it is and it is, even to the naked eyes, comfortably feasible.

Stay one night in a place far from the bright lights of big cities so that your eyes get used to darkness, and wait and relax, observing the celestial arch.
Scanning the myriads of stars that constitute the Milky Way is one of the biggest spectacles of skygazing.
In summer you will see a gigantic milky irregular bar crossing the arch, this appearance giving it its name since the Greek antiquity.

These are not strictly speaking celestial objects since they constitute a grouping of stars making the shape of a figure, in general that of an animal or a mythological being, this nomenclature dating back to the Ancient Greek times for the stars seen in the Northern Hemisphere.
Charts are available that show a complete view of what stars are visible at any given time on Earth.
Astronomy 101 is based on these star charts, enabling the reader to navigate amongst the stars, using the Polaris star as a celestial north-pointing compass to be able to find the brightest of the stars: the Andromeda galaxy or the most luminous star of the sky (Sirius of Canis Major) for example.
The Little Dipper (right photo) is not a constellation but is an asterism within the constellation Ursa Minor.

The observation of the Moon adapts to practically any condition, but for all other skygazing endeavors, the first piece of advice is to move away from all artificial lights; avoid cities because of their strong lights and pollution-created haze.
Move away from big towns to get the darkest possible sky.
For the same reason, avoid moonlit nights, especially when the moon is full, because its intense clarity hurts the observation strongly.
The eyes need time to adapt to the obscurity (about 15 to 30 minutes) to develop their full capacities in these conditions.
Any intense luminous ray (headlight of car, pocket-size lamp, etc.) "destroys" this familiarization and reduces strongly its capacities.
To avoid this problem, place a piece of opaque adhesive tape (preferably red) on your pocket-size lamp so that the least amount of light necessary for reading a sky chart will be available and nothing more.
<br / > For the best observation of the sky, choose an open area giving the largest possible field of vision.

Binoculars are very useful when you wish to observe bright, large astronomical objects.
Thanks to them it is possible to see lunar craters.
In spite of the distance between us and the Moon, one can observe the relief of these craters along the terminator, the separation line between the illuminated and darkened parts of the Moon.
Lunar features are emphasized in this zone where sunlight strikes at a low angle and casts long shadows.
This spectacle is a good start to skygazing due to its ease.

Binoculars are good for the observation of large nebulas and the occasional bright comet.
The reason is due to their very nature: the binocular enlarges images and adds brightness compared to naked eye views.
Very extended objects can be seen in their entirety due to the wide field of view (which may not be the case with a telescope and its greater magnification) and with improved clarity and contrast compared to the naked eye.
The Orion nebula is one of the most luminous and one of the easiest to locate.
It is situated in the constellation of Orion, a constellation visible in winter, big and easily recognizable with its rectangular form and a short row of three bright stars forming the belt of Orion.
One can also observe the cluster called the Pleiades, a stellar heap composed of over fifteen stars which can be found by extending one of the diagonals of the rectangle of Orion toward the northwest.
Also visible in the late summer, fall and winter is another striking spectacle which lies beyond our own Milky way galaxy, the Andromeda galaxy.
Though faintly visible to the naked eye, locating this object requires one to know how to identify the main constellations (see Locations of the constellations).
The constellation Andromeda is situated under Cassiopeia in relation to the polar star.
While viewing the Beta star of Andromeda in the binoculars, one ascends very slightly toward Cassiopeia until one sights a first small star, then one ascends again very slightly until one sees a fuzzy patch of light which is the heart of the Andromeda galaxy.
If sky conditions are good, you may also see a surrounding very diffuse oval that represents the arms of the galaxy.
This vast collection of stars is located 2.5 millions light year away!
It is one of the more distant objects that can be seen in common binoculars.

With experience, so long as the binoculars are held steadily and with decent atmospheric conditions, viewers endowed with good vision will be able to discern the four Galilean moons of Jupiter, even with simple 8 x 35.
Their features are determined by two numbers: the first number indicates the magnification, the second the diameter of the lenses in the front, or aperture.
Large apertures are recommended because they will collect more light and so reveal fainter objects.
Thus, while a birdwatcher might prefer a compact 8x35 binocular, a skygazer will do better with a larger 10x50 glass.
It is strongly recommended to fix the binocular to a tripod (used for photography, for example) in order to steady it, ensuring comfortable observation and helping the observer to avoid losing the field of the object.
Some models of binoculars are equipped with a tripod socket for easy attachment, but some adhesive tape will do the job in a pinch.
Adjust the binoculars in order to get the best possible picture by focusing and adjusting the distance between the eyepieces to match your own eyes.
If you wear glasses for astigmatism you'll probably want to leave them on.
Otherwise you should be able to focus the binocular sharply even without your glasses.

Important warning: Never attempt to observe the Sun with binoculars.
Special solar filters for binoculars exist, but are hard to find.
In direct observation, the power of the concentrated light would burn the eyes irreparably.
A similar example would be that of a magnifier which sets fire to a sheet of paper or a piece of wood.
A refracting telescope is an instrument containing at least two lenses which focus light into an image at the focal plane.
An eyepiece situated at the focus functions as a magnifying glass which works by permitting the eye of the observer to focus on this image at very close range, causing it to appear magnified.
A good refracting telescope can be an instrument that one retains all his or her life, even after the acquisition of a bigger telescope.

Jupiter is an ideal target for the first-timer equipped with a refracting telescope.
Its observation lets us see the four main companions of the planet which are the Galilean moons as well as some details to the surface of the planet clearly.
It shows how much the astronomical observation is a discipline of patience.
Those expecting great entertainment might opt for a more powerful telescope whose operation requires a finer mastery of the basics of astronomy.
It is well nowadays with a telescope less effective than all those sold in the business that Galileo discovered the moons of Jupiter and that he acquired the conviction that Copernicus had reason of it: the Earth moves!

With a refracting telescope, it is also possible to follow the phases of Venus and the change of its visible diameter with the passing of the months.
Mars appears like an orange disc, but often without the least detail.
One can follow however also there the fluctuation of its visible diameter all along the year.
In a good configuration between Mars and the Earth, when the red planet is to the nearest, it is possible to distinguish its polar cap.

The most distant bright planet that one can observe with the refracting telescope is Saturn.
If the conditions of observation are good, it unveils the very beautiful spectacle of its rings.
One can follow the change of their appearance.
In 2002, they were seen at their widest angle and best presentation, and will be seen in profile in 2010.
They will then completely invisible for a few days, after which they will again appear as a thin, bright line as the angle gradually increases once more.
Meanwhile, their appearance changes from year to year.
With experience it is also possible to distinguish the large moon Titan.

The refracting telescope is an instrument perfectly appropriate to the survey of the Sun, but drastic precautions must be taken to avoid any burn of the retina.
When these precautions have been taken, the Sun unveils its details distinctly.
One can see it evolve day after day and move because of its rotation.
It is also possible to observe more distinctly than with nebulous certain twins (M42) or globular clusters (M13).
Finally, let us not forget the Moon, on which a multitude of details offers themselves to you: craters, mountains, etc. As with binoculars, it is the observation to the level of the terminator that reveals the more of details, notably the reliefs of the Moon.

The main optical problem of refracting telescopes is chromatic aberration (color fringing).
When one observes a planet, the Moon, or a bright star at high magnification, it will be surrounded by a diffuse glow of unfocussed color, usually blue or violet.
This effect can be minimized by the use of a lens with a long focal length, but this can result in an unwieldy instrument.
Refractors can be made essentially free of false color using various apochromatic designs, many of which use three lenses (a triplet) as opposed to the two lenses (a doublet) found in the more common achromatic instruments.
This system is costly.
Refractors of this type can be less awkward because lenses of a shorter focal length can be used, resulting in a shorter telescope.
It is difficult to construct refractors of more than 150 mm of aperture because of the expense of the raw glass and the possibility of breakage in manufacturing.
Let's add that a refractor is expensive in relation to a telescope of other design on the same size.
60 mm diameter refractors are cheap, but from 100 mm and up they can be three times as expensive (or more) than a mirror telescope of the same aperture.
On the other hand a telescope can transport itself comfortably because it doesn't go out of order easily (goal is steady), which is a certain benefit.
Otherwise, in a telescope, the objective is not obstructed in part by the secondary mirror that one finds in reflecting telescopes, what enhances the quality of the picture, the full surface of objective being used to collect light.
The best choice (but also the costliest) is the apochromatic telescope that corrects all aberrations (chromatic and spherical).
Its observation, again same with binocular (see above), must come with the strictest safety measures.
The burn of the retina is painless, but it is irreversible.
It is therefore necessary to use the filters of which exist two types: the Sun filter, amounting to the back on the eyepiece, often sold with the telescope.
Its only usage is not adapted because it is submitted to strong temperatures that coalesce it to explode quickly.
Its usage must be combined with the helioscope of Herschel that disperses the heat.
This accessory is generally on sale that in the specialized shops.
The second model stands in the front, on goal, and reduced the luminous flow before its entry in the instrument.
Costlier, it is the safest solution, under the condition to use the suitable filter.
This solution has in its favor a double avantage: disposed out of the optic system, therefore to ambient temperature, there is not any hazard that it breaks because of the heat.
On the other hand, placed before the telescope, before doesn't shape itself the picture, its shortcomingses will influence less on the quality of this one that the first type of filter installed on the just eyepiece before the eye.

In any case, check the installation carefully before starting the observation of the Sun.
It is never ridiculous to place a sheet of paper behind the eyepiece in order to confirm that all is in order and that the brightness is not too strong: your eyes are priceless.
At its full phase, it can appear spectacular, but otherwise makes little interest of itself.
Indeed, having it from the Earth a parallel vision line to the Sun, one cannot distinguish shades on its surface that permit us to see the details of it.
Thus, prefer the periods before or after this stage and concentrate the observation on the zone to the limit of the illuminated party and the one to the shade, where the rays shine its surface and give the best reading of the craters.

Note that some filters also exist for placing on the eyepiece at the time of the observation of the Moon in order to not to be dazzled by the very strong clarity of the Full Moon.
Unlike the Sun, there is no hazard in case of oblivion of the filter when gazing the Moon.
Its usage is recommended however because it filters the UV reflected by the surface of the Moon.
The Moon filters must not be used for the observation of the Sun.
A reflecting telescope is constituted not of lenses but of mirrors.
It being less costly to manufacture, one can, for the price of a refracting telescope, acquire an instrument of the more important diameter that gives access to the deep space.
Nevertheless, to take advantage of the power of a reflecting telescope, it is necessary to have a good site of observation safe from the lights of the city, otherwise the usage of a good telescope is preferable.

With a 150mm lensed reflecting telescope, the viewer is able to distinguish the spiral arms of some galaxies and details in many stellar or star clusters.
With such an instrument, most of the Messier objects can be appreciated in good details.
These instruments are also very interesting when they are used for planet-gazing which they reveal, thanks to their best power of annulment, a multitude of details as the Great Red Spot of Jupiter, visible with a telescope of 200 mm or the Cassini Division in the rings of Saturn.
It becomes possible to follow the alterations of appearance of the main planets of the solar system with the passing of the months, and the craters of the Moon appear with all their details on the terminator.

A sufficiently powerful reflecting telescope (300mm) opens the way to hunt for the comets, the holy grail of the amateur astronomers.
All of them dream to be the first to discover a new star to which they will give their name.
The hunters of comets constitute a world a little to part in the astronomy hobbyist.
Besides being an expensive material, the research of comet requires a big rigor because it demands systematic observations, but some hobbyists count close to about ten of these stars on their chart of hunt.

Some either the type of observation led, it is while getting involved in the astrophotography that one gets the best part of its instrument.
As lengthening the time of exposure, the brightness and the contrasts of the picture permits to reveal the thinnest details.
The best solution accessible to everybody is the use of a sensor CCD connected to a computer.
These sensors are built in all electronic devices with capacities of taking images (webcam, digital camera, cell phone, etc.).
The present sensors in these devices can be used in CCD astrophotography, but the best pictures are taken with monochromatic sensors.
In any case, a little tinkering is necessary.
The hobbyist of astronomy who wants to become amateur astronomer must start learning the fundamental principles of the optics to be able to achieve their own tinkerings because some instruments of optimal performances are not sold in the store.
There are two popular types of reflecting telescopes: the Newtownian and the Catadioptric.

The Newtonian type is characterized by a long enough tube, a bit lower in its focal length and is composed of a parabolic main mirror to the substance bound to a flat alternative mirror close to the opening, oriented to 45°, that return the light outwards through the eyepiece.
The observation makes itself therefore by the side of the tube that is open and will let dusts to enter and deposit themselves on the mirror.
Its another inconvenience is that the temperature inside the tube is slightly higher than the temperature of the surrounding environment (at least in the beginning of the night), the hotter air, while escaping, will invoke the turbulences that will harm the quality of the picture.
The Schmidt is a design that uses all spherical surfaces, making it an instrument that is easy to manufacture.
It employs a cassegrain design with a compound curve corrector plate at the front of the tube that "corrects" all the aberration a spherical system would have (and also gives the telescope the advantage of having a sealed tube).
The secondary mirror in a Schmidt is mounted on the corrector plate.
The Maksutov, is similar to the Schmidt except it uses a thick concave corrector plate and the secondary is usually a silvered spot on the backside of the corrector (a "spot-mak").
This design has the added advantage over a Schmidt in that it never needs alignment, all optical elements are fixed in alignment.

The big benefit of the reflecting telescope on the refracting telescope is its manufacturing cost, what permits to acquire for a reasonable amount an instrument of bigger diameter, lien of a big necessary brightness at the time of the observation of the distant and weakly luminous objects.
Otherwise, the chromatic aberration doesn't exist with this type of instrument, but the alternative mirror overlooks goal in part, what is an inconvenience (loss of brightness of the order of 5 to 10%).
A telescope, unlike a telescope, asks for an entretien: the primary mirror has a certain degree of freedom in the tube and can in some cases (a physical shock for example) to go out of order, requiring a realignment that one undertakes oneself thus.
This same mirror being coated of a very fine coat of aluminium, deteriorates to the contact of air and has a life of 8 to 10 years.
Specialist firms take care of the transaction.

Computerized setting circles are called "digital setting circles."
Although digital setting circles can be used to display a telescope's RA and Dec coordinates, they are not simply a digital read out of what can be seen on the telescope's analog setting circles.
As with go-to telescopes, digital setting circle computers (commercial names include Argo Navis, Sky Commander, and NGC Max) actually contain databases of tens of thousands of celestial objects and projections of planet positions.
To find an object, such as globular cluster NGC 6712, one does not need to look up the RA and Dec coordinates in a book, and then move the telescope to those numerical readings.
Rather, the object is chosen from the database and arrow markers appear in the display which indicate the direction to move the telescope.
The telescope is moved until the distance value reaches zero.
When both the RA and Dec axes are thus "zeroed out," the object should be in the eyepiece.
The user therefore does not have to go back and forth from some other database (such as a book or laptop) to get to the desired object.
However, many dscs, and also go-to systems, can work in conjunction with laptop sky programs.

But digital setting circle or go-to systems also provide touring functions whereby the user can set parameters such as magnitude and class of object, and, for example, view a series of planetary nebulae in Cygnus.
A user who has discovered that his list of close double stars is impossible to view because of the seeing conditions can select an alternative viewing program within minutes.
Many middle aged and older amateur astronomers discovered that electronic pointing systems were not only convenient but spared them the difficult postures and associated aches and pains that go with pointing a telescope at zenith (with the common straight-through finder) or near to the horizon (on elevated mounts the finder can be out of reach).
The explosion of astrophotography, in which a web cam or ccd camera is mounted on a telescope and downloads data to a nearby laptop, further enhanced demand for robotic systems that would point the telescope while the operator could stay seated and set imaging parameters.

All told the market for amateur equipment has moved decisively in the direction of some form of computerized finding assistance.
This includes inexpensive digital setting circles for introductory level telescopes ($300 to $1,000), where pointing assistance only is provided, to more sophisticated systems that not only aim the telescope but provide tracking.
In the popular Dobson style Newtonian reflectors object tracking is made possibly by computers that can keep an object placed in the field of view by calculating the gear motions required in both the altitude and azimuth axes.
The advantage of being able to view a planet at high power without having to keep moving the telescope manually to keep it in view has seduced many telescope owners into accepting the additional set up time and equipment complexity required for computerized systems.