Art usually refers to the visual arts, being different from the other "arts".
The concept of what art is has continuously changed over centuries, and perhaps the most concise definition is its most broad—"art" refers all creative human endeavors, excluding actions directly related to survival and reproduction.
From a wide perspective, "art" is simply a generic term for the creative impulse, out of which sprang all other human pursuits, such as science, via alchemy, and religion via shamanism.

The etymological root of the word 'art' is Latin, 'ars.'
which, loosely translated, means 'arrangement' or 'to arrange' (though in many dictionaries you will simply find it tautologically translated as 'art').
This is the only universal definition of art - that whatever it is was at some point arranged in some way.
A few linguistic examples that show this significance are artifact, artifice, artillery, medical arts, and military arts.

However, there are many other colloquial uses of the word, all with some relation to its etymological roots.
Confusion about the meaning of the term derives from two places: 1) Multiple meanings often used interchangeably in conversation, and 2) Deep-seated cultural prejudices in the relation of objects and practices to value and social class.
The most common use of the word 'art' today actually is an indication of social class associations with an object or practice, usually combined with one of the other definitions of art.

The other common definitions of the word fit into two categories: a) Good, and b) Deceptive.
Most of the confusion about what can be or cannot be deemed 'art' comes from an unconsidered use of the word to describe a qualitative value.
It is this use of the word as an absolute measure of quality or value that gives the term its appearance of subjectivity.
This is because the various standards individuals use to ascribe qualitative determinants, and to determine whether a specific thing passes or fails the predetermined tests is itself a completely subjective game.
In the entries above there are a number which claim the measure of something as art is entirely dependent on their subjective qualitative value system (meaningful, skilled, emotive, etc.).

This also explains why most peoples' choices of what is art fall well in line with generally accepted standards of social class hierarchy.
Most people did not consider the 'artfulness,' (meaning social class associations and judgment of quality) of a Brillo Box until Andy Warhol (or a urinal until Marcel Duchamp) placed it in a specific context, ie.
the gallery, which then inherently associated the objects with social class and the classist institutions of art.
Most viewers of these objects initially rejected such associations, as the objects did not, themselves, have associations with higher social status; quite the opposite, in fact.
It required that the objects be canonized within the accepted context in order to achieve the near-universal acceptance as 'art' they enjoy today.

However, while certainly valid, this is perhaps too cynical & narrow a perspective.
In addition to "anointing the chosen", the placement of unexpected objects within a context of credibility, i.e. a museum or gallery, forces the viewer to seek out artistic qualities that may be hidden beneath the gloss of familiarity.
As an example, viewed with a fresh eye the smooth, white surfaces of Duchamp's urinal are strikingly similar to classical marble sculptural forms (whether the artist intended it or no).
This type of recontextualizing provides the same spark of connection that we expect from any "good" art.
Definitions of art & aesthetic arguments usually proceed from one of several possible perspectives, i.e.: art is defined by the intention of the artist (as Dewey); art is in the response/emotion of the viewer (as Tolstoy); art is a character of the item itself; art is a function of an object's context (as Danto); or art is imitation (as Plato).
Obviously, there is validity in each of these perspectives & any useful definition of art must, at minimum, address all these categories.

There is wide disagreement over what constitutes art, and there is no single definition that is widely agreed upon.
A common view is that art requires a creative and unique perception of both the artist and audience.
For example, a common contemporary criticism of some modern painting might be, "my five-year old could have painted that"—implying that the work is somehow less worthy of the title "art," either because the viewer fails to find meaning in the work, or because the work does not appear to have required any skill to produce.
This view is often described as a "layman critique" where emphasis (in Western culture) has traditionally been pushed in the direction of representationalism, the literal description of literal images.

Art can connote a sense of trained ability or mastery of a medium.
It can also simply refer to the developed and efficient use of a language so as to convey meaning, with immediacy and or depth.
Making this judgment requires a basis for criticism: a way to determine whether the sensory input meets the criteria to be considered art, whether it is perceived to be ugly or beautiful.
Perception is always colored by experience, so a reaction to art as "ugly" or "beautiful" is necessarily subjective.
Countless schools have each proposed their own ways to define quality, yet they all seem to agree in at least one point: once one has accepted their aesthetic choices, the value of your work is determined by its capacity to transcend the limits of its chosen medium in order to strike some universal chord (which, oddly enough, tends to be the most personal one).

Art also appeals to human emotions.
It can arouse aesthetic or moral feelings, and can be understood as a way of communicating these feelings.
The artist has to express himself so that his public is aroused, but he does not have to do it consciously.
Art both explores human emotions and ways to arouse them - the good art brings something new and original in either of these two respects.

Consider photography: are photographs of un-posed, "real life" to be considered art?
The common answer is overwhelmingly yes, even though many of these photographs simply seek to mechanically reproduce what people can see with their own eyes.
However, the reproduction is not neutral--a selection is being made by the artist.
This is also one of the goals of found art: to recontextualize the art of everyday objects.
Artistic expression takes many forms, primarily abstract.
References are common and important; a strong piece of art is a self-referential system; that is, all parts of the system contribute to the organic integrity of the whole.
Extraneous or missing elements are seen to degrade the artistic integrity of the work.

"Pure" art is aesthetic rather than utilitarian.
In contrast, design is the process of making utilitarian objects more beautiful.
Clothes, parks, and cool-looking automobiles are designed; paintings and sculpture are art.
There is, however, considerable grey area; architecture, for instance, falls somewhere in between, depending on the nature of the undertaking.
In addition, purely aesthetic objects can be said to have, at the very least, entertainment value, which can be considered useful.

There is no definite limit to what can or cannot be called art; in the end, it is up to the audience.
The musician Frank Zappa believed that "Anything can be music, but it doesn't become music until someone wills it to be music, and the audience listening to it decides to perceive it as music.
Most people can't deal with that abstraction--or don't want to."

Most of the previous comments add up to an obfuscation, with the exception of the comments by Frank Zappa, above.
However, Zappa's analysis is by a great measure incomplete.
While it is true that any material object can be deemed 'art,' a historical and etymological analysis will add the missing elements to understand the importance of calling something by that label.
Artistic expression takes many forms, primarily abstract.
References are common and important; a strong piece of art is a self-referential system; that is, all parts of the system contribute to the organic integrity of the whole.
Extraneous or missing elements are seen to degrade the artistic integrity of the work.

"Pure" art is aesthetic rather than utilitarian.
In contrast, design is the process of making utilitarian objects more beautiful.
Clothes, parks, and cool-looking automobiles are designed; paintings and sculpture are art.
There is, however, considerable grey area; architecture, for instance, falls somewhere in between, depending on the nature of the undertaking.
In addition, purely aesthetic objects can be said to have, at the very least, entertainment value, which can be considered useful.

There is no definite limit to what can or cannot be called art; in the end, it is up to the audience.
The musician Frank Zappa believed that "Anything can be music, but it doesn't become music until someone wills it to be music, and the audience listening to it decides to perceive it as music.
Most people can't deal with that abstraction--or don't want to."

Most of the previous comments add up to an obfuscation, with the exception of the comments by Frank Zappa, above.
However, Zappa's analysis is by a great measure incomplete.
While it is true that any material object can be deemed 'art,' a historical and etymological analysis will add the missing elements to understand the importance of calling something by that label.
There are many who ascribe to certain arts the quality of being non-utilitarian.
This fits within the 'art as good' system of definitions and suffers from a class prejudice against labor and utility.
Opponents of this view argue that all human activity has some utilitarian function, and these objects claimed to be 'non-utilitarian' actually have the rather mundane and banal utility of attempting to mystify and codify unworkable justifications for arbitrary social hierarchy.

Also interesting is the etymology of the word technique, from which many other current English words are derived.
This word comes from the Greek techně meaning art.
Thus in our culture we have two words that diverge as if to opposite ends of the spectrum unnaturally drawn between Art and Science, which are in fact share more or less the same meaning, and incorporate the idea of skill at some point.

It is often argued that what we term art is impossible to define, because standards for judging it are subjective.
For example the work of painter Jackson Pollock appears to be the result of throwing and pouring of paint on a canvas, apparently without skill.
(Pollock's skill as a painter in particular is not the point of my discussion) and this (along with a thousand and one other examples) has led many to question the validity of much contemporary art (not that Pollock can be said to be contemporary of course; nevertheless his influence has been very great), when it seems to be something that any three-year-old could easily do.
This may or may not be true, however we can at least say that there is often a concensus of agreement about what can be considered art.
This concensus does not appear to be static over time, and could be seen as being similar to evolution's doctrine of survival of the fittest, where even very good ideas inevitably disappear and get ploughed under by history, while other ideas survive, sometimes by luck as well as their genuine usefulness.

Art is often seen as belonging to one class and excluding others.
Art is seen as a high-status activity associated with wealth and the ability to purchase art and the leisure required to enjoy it.
This has historically been true.
One only has to briefly consider the palaces of Versailles or the Hermitage in St Petersberg with their vast collections of art, amassed by the fabulously wealthy royalty of Europe to bring this image vividly to life, and it is certainly true that collecting art is the preserve of the rich.
However there is a very rich tradition of artists doing the opposite, and bringing their vision down to earth, and inhabiting a world of the everyday and even the poverty stricken.
Just look at a Vincent Van Gogh painting.

Many people's opinion of what art is falls inside a relatively small range of accepted standards.
This derives from education and other social factors.
Most people did not consider the depiction of a Brillo Box or a store-bought urinal to be art until Andy Warhol and Marcel Duchamp placed them in the context of art, i.e. the art gallery, which then provided the association of these objects with the values that define art.

How best to define the term “art” is a subject of much contention; many books and journal articles have been published arguing over the even the basics of what we mean by the term “art” (Davies, 1991 and Carroll, 2000).
Theodor Adorno claimed in 1969 “It is self-evident that nothing concerning art is self-evident any more.” (Danto, 2003).
Indeed, it is not even clear anymore who has the right to define art.
Artists, philosophers, anthropologists, and psychologists all use the notion of art in their respective fields, and give it operational definitions that are not very similar to each others.

The second, more narrow, more recent sense of the word “art” is roughly as an abbreviation for creative art or “fine art.”  Here we mean that skill is being used to express the artist’s creativity, or to engage the audience’s aesthetic sensibilities, or to draw the audience towards consideration of the “finer” things.
Often, if the skill is being used in a lowbrow or practical way, people will consider it a craft instead of art.
Often is skill is being used in a commercial or industrial way it will be considered design instead of art.
On the other hand, crafts and design are sometimes considered applied art.
Some thinkers have argued that the difference between fine art and applied art has more to do with value judgments made about the art than any clear definitional difference (Novitz, 1992).
However, even fine art often has goals beyond just pure creativity and self-expression.
The purpose of works of art may be to communicate ideas, such as in politically-, spiritually-, or philosophically-motivated art, to create a sense of beauty (see “aesthetics”), to explore the nature of perception, for pleasure, or to generate strong emotions.

Art is a deeply cultural issue, especially in the creative, expressive or fine arts.
An artifact, may seem an everyday product of craftsmanship in its home culture, but be considered a museum-worthy sublime piece that elevates our contemplation to the loftiest issues in another culture.
Greek painted pottery, and medieval manuscript illuminations, were both considered crafts rather than fine arts in their day, but are often displayed as fine art rather than mere historical artifacts today.
Aesthetics, or the philosophy of art, often engages in disputes about the best way to define art.
General pictures of the nature of art are called “theories of art.”

Plato is often portrayed as believing that art is inherently imitative of the sensual world, and as such that it could be used to lead people away from the real and toward the unreal.
In Plato’s Republic, Socrates distrusts visual artists, banishes them from his ideal city, and limits musicians to playing some forms of music but not others, for fear of leading the populous to base forms of sensuality, rather than contemplation of the finer things.
Aristotle, on the other hand, argued that art might show the real in a new light, and might serve the purpose of emotional catharsis.
Nonetheless Greek philosophers initially felt that aesthetically appealing objects were beautiful in and of themselves.
Plato felt that beautiful objects incorporated proportion, harmony, and unity among their parts.
Similarly, in the "Metaphysics" Aristotle found that the universal elements of beauty were order, symmetry, and definiteness.
In 1750, Alexander Gottlieb Baumgarten published the book "Aesthetica," coining the modern use of the term.
He took the term to encompass a science of sensual recognition.
Baumgarten wanted a science of aesthetics, so that a discussion of the beautiful would not be reduced to a mere discussion of taste ("Geschmack").
In his 1790 book Critique of Judgment, Immanuel Kant called Aesthetics "the science which treats of the conditions of sensuous perception".
Kant emphasized beauty, taste, transcendence, and the sublime.
Beautiful art might fall into the category of what we think today as pretty, pleasant, or pleasing to the eye.
Sublime images on the other hand were awe-inspiring.
Dramatic scenes from nature such as vast mountainscapes, the dazzling sea, or light shining through forested trees might produce an experience of the sublime.
Kant insisted that aesthetic judgment is always singular, of the form "This rose is beautiful."
He denied that we can reach a valid universal aesthetic judgment of the form "All objects possessing such and such qualities are beautiful."
The Irish philosopher Edmund Burke also made an important contribution on the question of the sublime and beautiful.
The German Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel and later French philosophers J. Cousin and Jean Charles Leveque developed elaborate systems of aesthetics regarding it as spiritual in nature.
For them all beauty was in its objective essence either spirit or unconscious force acting with fullness and in order.
Many have argued that it is a mistake to even try to define art or beauty, that they have no essence, and so can have no definition.
Often, it is said that art is a cluster of related concepts rather than a single concept.
Examples of this approach include Morris Weitz and Berys Gaut.

Another approach is to say that “art” is basically a sociological category, that whatever art schools and museums, and artists get away with is considered art regardless of formal definitions.
This "institutional definition of art" has been championed by George Dickie.
Most people did not consider the depiction of a Brillo Box or a store-bought urinal to be art until Andy Warhol and Marcel Duchamp (respectively) placed them in the context of art (i.e., the art gallery), which then provided the association of these objects with the values that define art.
The placement of an object in an artistic context is not taken as a universal standard of art, but is a common characteristic of conceptual art, prevalent since the 1960s; notably, the Stuckist art movement criticizes this tendency of recent art.

Proceduralists often suggest that it is the process by which a work of art is created or viewed that makes it, art, not how well received it is by the institutions of the art world after its introduction to society at large.
For John Dewey, for instance, if the writer intended a piece to be a poem, it is one whether other poets acknowledge it or not.
Whereas if exactly the same set of word was written by a journalist, intending them as shorthand notes to help him write a longer article latter, these would not be a poem.
Leo Tolstoy, on the other hand, claims that what makes something art or not is how it is experienced by its audience, not by the intention of its creator.
Functionalists, like Monroe Beardsley argue that whether or not a piece counts as art depends on what function it plays in a particular context, the same Greek vase may play a non-artistic function in one context (carrying wine), and an artistic function in another context (helping us to appreciate the beauty of the human figure).

Often one of the defining characteristics of fine art as opposed to applied art, is the absence of any clear usefulness or utilitarian value.
But this requirement is sometimes criticized as being a class prejudice against labor and utility.
Opponents of the view that art cannot be useful, argue that all human activity has some utilitarian function, and the objects claimed to be "non-utilitarian" actually have the function of attempting to mystify and codify flawed social hierarchies.
It is also sometimes argued that even seemingly non-useful art is not useless, but rather that its use is the effect it has on the psyche of the creator or viewer.

Art is also used by art therapists, psychotherapists and clinical psychologists as art therapy.

The boundaries between form and genre can be quite fluid.
So, for example, it is not clear whether song lyrics are best thought of as an art form distinct from poetry, or a genre within poetry.
Is cinematography a genre of photography (perhaps “motion photography”) or is it a distinct form?

An artistic medium is the substance the artistic work is made out of.
So for example stone and bronze are both mediums that sculpture uses sometimes.
Multiple forms can share a medium (poetry and music, both use sound), or one form can use multiple media.

An artwork or artist’s style is a particular approach they take to their art.
Sometimes style embodies a particular artistic philosophy or goal, we might describe Joy Division as Minimalist in style, in this sense, for example.
Sometimes style is intimately linked with a particular historical period, or a particular artistic movement.
So we might describe Dali’s paintings as Surrealist in style in this sense.
Sometimes style is linked to a technique used, or an effect produced, so we might describe a painting as pointillist, if it emphasized the technique, even if it was not aligned with the original proponents of Pointillism.

Many terms used to describe art, especially recent art, are hard to categorize as forms, genres, or styles; or such categorizations are disputed.
No one doubts there is such a thing as land art, but is it best thought of as a distinct form of art?
Or, perhaps, as a genre of architecture?
Or perhaps as a style within the genre of landscape architecture?
Are comics an art form, medium, genre, style, or perhaps more than one of these?


The great traditions in art have a foundation in the art of one of the six great ancient civilizations: Ancient Egypt, Mesopotamia, Greece, Rome, India, or China.
Each of these centers of early civilization developed a unique and characteristic style in their art.
Because of their size and duration these civilizations, more of their art works have survived and more of their influence has been transmitted to other cultures and later times.
They have also provided us with the first records of how artists worked.
For example, this period of Greek art saw a veneration of the human physical form and the development of equivalent skills to show musculature, poise, beauty and anatomically correct proportions

In the east, Islam’s rejection of iconography led to emphasis on geometric patterns, calligraphy, calligraphy, and architecture.
Further east, religion dominated artistic styles and forms too.
India and Tibet saw emphasis on painted sculptures and dance with religious painting borrowing many conventions from sculpture and tending to bright contrasting colors with emphasis on outlines.
China saw many art forms flourish, jade carving, bronzework, pottery (including the stunning terracotta army of Emperor Qin), poetry, calligraphy, music, painting, drama, fiction, etc. Chinese styles vary greatly from era to era and are traditionally named after the ruling dynasty.
So, for example, Tang dynasty paintings are monochromatic and sparse, emphasizing idealized landscapes, but Ming dynasty paintings are busy, colorful, and focus on telling stories via setting and composition.
Japan names its styles after imperial dynasties too, and also saw much interplay between the styles of calligraphy and painting.
Woodblock printing became important in Japan after the 17th century.

The western “Age of Enlightenment” in the 18th century, saw artistic depictions of physical and rational certainties of the clockwork universe, as well as politically revolutionary visions of a post-monarchist world, such as Blake’s portrayal of Newton as a divine geometer, or David’s propagandistic paintings.
But this led to Romantic rejections of this in favor of pictures of the emotional side and individuality of humans, exemplified in the novels of Goethe and the music of Mozart.
The late 19th century then saw a host of artistic movements, symbolism, Impressionism, fauvism, etc.

By the 20th century these pictures were falling apart, shattered not only by new discoveries of relativity by Einstein and of unseen psychology by Freud,  but also by unprecedented technological development accelerated by the implosion of civilisation in two world wars.
The history of twentieth century art is a narrative of endless possibilities and the search for new standards, each being torn down in succession by the next.
Thus the parameters of Impressionism, Expressionism, Fauvism, Cubism, Dadaism, Surrealism, etc cannot be maintained very much beyond the time of their invention.
Increasing global interaction during this time saw an equivalent influence of other cultures into Western art, such as Pablo Picasso being influenced by African sculpture.
Japanese woodblock prints (which had themselves been influenced by Western Renaissance draftsmanship) had an immense influence on Impressionism and subsequent development.
Then African fetish sculptures were taken up by Picasso and to some extent by Matisse.
Similarly, the west has had huge impacts on Eastern art in 19th and 20th century, with originally western ideas like Communism and Post-Modernism exerting powerful influence on artistic styles.

Modernism, the idealistic search for truth, gave way in the latter half of the 20th century to a realization of its unattainability.
Relativity was accepted as an unavoidable truth, which led to the Postmodern period, where cultures of the world and of history are seen as changing forms, which can be appreciated and drawn from only with irony.

Making judgments of value requires a basis for criticism.
At the simplest level, a way to determine whether the impact of the object on the senses meets the criteria to be considered art, is whether it is perceived to be attractive or repulsive.
Though perception is always colored by experience, and is necessarily subjective, it is commonly taken that that which is not aesthetically satisfying in some fashion cannot be art.
However, "good" art is not always or even regularly aesthetically appealing to a majority of viewers.
In other words, an artist's prime motivation need not be the pursuit of the aesthetic.
Also, art often depicts terrible images made for social, moral, or thought-provoking reasons.
For example, Francisco Goya's painting depicting the Spanish shootings of 3rd of May 1808, is a graphic depiction of a firing squad executing several pleading civilians.
Yet at the same time, the horrific imagery demonstrates Goya's keen artistic ability in composition and execution and his fitting social and political outrage.
Thus, the debate continues as to what mode of aesthetic satisfaction, if any, is required to define 'art'.

The assumption of new values or the rebellion against accepted notions of what is aesthetically superior need not occur concurrently with a complete abandonment of the pursuit of that which is aesthetically appealing.
Indeed, the reverse is often true, that in the revision of what is popularly conceived of as being aesthetically appealing, allows for a re-invigoration of aesthetic sensibility, and a new appreciation for the standards of art itself.
Countless schools have proposed their own ways to define quality, yet they all seem to agree in at least one point: once their aesthetic choices are accepted, the value of the work of art is determined by its capacity to transcend the limits of its chosen medium in order to strike some universal chord, by the rarity of the skill of the artist, or in its accurate reflection in what is termed the zeitgeist.
Art appeals to many of the human emotions.
It can arouse aesthetic or moral feelings, and can be understood as a way of communicating these feelings.
Artists express something so that their audience is aroused to some extent, but they do not have to do so consciously.
Art explores what is commonly termed as the human condition that is essentially what it is to be human.
Effective art often brings about some new insight concerning the human condition either singly or en-mass, which is not necessarily always positive, or necessarily widens the boundaries of collective human ability.
The degree of skill that the artist has, will affect their ability to trigger an emotional response and thereby provide new insights, the ability to manipulate them at will shows exemplary skill and determination.

From one perspective, art is a generic term for any product of the creative impulse, out of which sprang all other human pursuits, such as science via alchemy.
The term "art" offers no true definition besides those based within the cultural, historical, and geographical context in which it is applied.
It is because of the desire to create in the face of financial hardship, lack of recognition, or political opposition, that artists are sometimes thought of as misguided, or eccentric.
However, the romantic myth of the starving artist in "his" garret is a very rare occurrence.
Much of the development of individual artist deals with finding principles for how to express certain ideas through various kinds of symbolism.
For example, Wassily Kandinsky developed his use of color in painting through a system of stimulus response, where over time he gained an understanding of the emotions that can be evoked by color and combinations of color.