Alexander was a legend in his own time.
His court historian, Callisthenes portrayed the sea in Cilicia as drawing back from him in proskynesis.
Writing after Alexander's death, another participant, Onesicritus, went so far as to invent a tryst between Alexander and Thalestris, queen of the mythical Amazons.
(When Onesicritus read this passage to his patron, Alexander's general and later King Lysimachus, prompted the Lysimachus to muse sarcastically "I wonder where I was at the time.")

Sometime in first centuries after Alexander's death, a quantity of the more legendary material coalesced into a text known as the "Alexander Romance," later falsely ascribed to the historian Calisthenes and therefore known as Pseudo-Calisthenes.
This text underwent numerous expansions and revisions throughout Antiquity and the Middle Ages, with a plasticity unseen in "higher" literary forms.
Latin and Syriac translations were made in Late Anqituity.
From these mostly developed versions in all the major languages of Europe and the Middle East, including Armenian, Georgian, Persian, Arabic, Turkish, Serbian, Slavonic, Rumanian, Hungarian, German, English, Italian, and French.
The "Romance" is regarded by most scholars as the source of the account of Alexander given in the Koran (Sura "The Cave").
It is the source of many incident's in Ferdowsi's "Shahnama".
A Mongol version is extant.

Macedon was located in the northernmost part of classical Greece.
In an effort to unite the rest of the Greek world against the ascendant power of Philip II, Demosthenes and others derided the Macedonians as barbarians.
Isocrates and most other contemporary scholars, however, regarded them as Greeks, despite their perceived poverty and backwardness.

When Philip led an attack on Byzantium in 340 BC, Alexander, aged 16, was left in command of the Macedonia.
He sucessfully defended the kingdom from the Maedi (a Thracian tribe) and defeated the Sacred Band of Thebes, earning a reputation as a brave an cunning general.
In 339 BC Philip divorced Alexander's mother, leading to a quarrel between Alexander and his father which threw Alexander's succession to the Macedonian throne into question.

After the death of Philip, Alexander, then aged 20, was acclaimed by the army as the new king of Macedon.
He immediately ordered the execution of all of his potential rivals and marched south with his armies in a campaign to solidify control of Greece and confront the Persian Empire.
Alexander then proceeded across Asia Minor, defeating the main Persian army of Darius III Codomannus at the Battle of Issus in 333 BC.
Marching down the Mediterranean coast, he took Tyre and Gaza after famous sieges.

The ancient sources for Alexander's life are, from the perspective of ancient history, relatively numerous.
Alexander himself left only a few inscriptions and some letter-fragments of dubious authenticity, but a large number of his contemporaries wrote full accounts.
These included his court historian Callisthenes, his general Ptolemy (later Ptolemy I of Egypt), and a camp engineer Aristoboulus.
Another early and influential account was penned by Cleitarchus.
Unfortunately, these works were lost.
Instead, the modern historian must rely on authors who used these and other early sources.
The five main accounts are by Arrian, Curtius, Mestrius Plutarch, Diodorus, and Justin.
Much is recounted incidentally in other authors, especially including Strabo.

The "problem of the sources" is the main concern (and chief delight) of Alexander-historians.
In effect, each presents a different "Alexander," with details to suit.
Arrian presents a flattering portrait, Curtius a darker one.
Plutarch can't resist a good story, light or dark.
All include a considerable level of fantasy, prompting the historian Strabo (2.1.9) to remark, "All who wrote about Alexander preferred the marvellous to the true."
Nevertheless, the sources tell us much, and leave much to our interpretation and imagination.

Surviving classical period histories:Alexander was a legend in his own time.
His court historian, Callisthenes portrayed the sea in Cilicia as drawing back from him in proskynesis.
Writing after Alexander's death, another participant, Onesicritus, went so far as to invent a tryst between Alexander and Thalestris, queen of the mythical Amazons.
(When Onesicritus read this passage to his patron, Alexander's general and later King Lysimachus, Lysimachus quipped "I wonder where I was at the time?")

In the first centuries after Alexander's death, probably in Alexandria, a quantity of the more legendary material coalesced into a text known as the "Alexander Romance," later falsely ascribed to the historian Callisthenes and therefore known as Pseudo-Callisthenes.
This text underwent numerous expansions and revisions throughout Antiquity and the Middle Ages, exhibiting a plasticity unseen in "higher" literary forms.
Latin and Syriac translations were made in Late Antiquity.
From these, versions were developed in all the major languages of Europe and the Middle East, including Armenian, Georgian, Persian, Arabic, Turkish, Hebrew, Serbian, Slavonic, Romanian, Hungarian, German, English, Italian, and French.The "Romance" is regarded by most scholars as the source of the account of Alexander given in the Koran (Sura "The Cave").
It is the source of many incidents in Ferdowsi's "Shahnama".
A Mongol version is extant.

Alexander’s army was one of the first to successfully use siege weapons.
His father, Philip did have siege material but never figured out how to utilize his new powerful weapon.
After his father’s death Alexander had to squelch revolts from neighboring city/states during his first months as king.
He had to deal with the city-state Thebes.
When he arrived at Thebes, he gave them a chance to surrender but they refused, so he used his siege weapons to attack the city’s walls.
The weapon he used is called a catapult.
The catapult is a machine, which throws huge rocks.
This weapon is very useful for destroying walls and buildings.
They also had a weapon that launched huge arrows.
Both of these siege weapons used torsion to launch their ammo (Fox 104-105).
Alexander’s army also had many other dimensions to it such as a great Calvary.
The Calvary was considered the heart of Alexander’s army.
The well-trained Calvary was an important factor, which helped turn the battle in Alexander’s favor.
His Calvary was made up of two types or units.
The first had long spears, which were used to pierce enemy ranks.
The second were units that carried long two-handed swords.
These units had to be well trained because these riders did not have stirrups yet (Fox 108-111).
His army also consisted of spearmen that carried weapons that were thirteen feet long (“The Real” n.p.).
These spearmen were very effective against Calvary and charging footmen.
These soldiers were trained to wave their spears up and down while charging, this helped deflect any arrows that were shot in their direction.
This type of infantry was very competent in the open battlefield but had trouble turning their ranks in battle.
They also had difficulty maneuvering in certain terrains.
Unfortunately for Alexander these weapons had many constraints on them and could only excel in certain conditions.
His army also had archers and slingers that helped Alexander with his long-range attack.
These troops proved to be very useful against the Persian archers.
One of the more effective infantries he had were the shield bearers.
These men carried shields as well as swords.
This type of infantry was useful to Alexander he kept these men on the far left and right ranks of his men just in case of ambush.
If he was flanked by his enemies he had men who were well armed and protected to defend the interior.
Alexander also had certain units that could be compared to America’s Special Forces unit.
These men were called Gurkhas and they carried javelins.
Alexander used Gurkhas for rough climbs and night attacks.
During this time period no other army had such diversity.
Alexander was well known for his skill in balancing armies (Fox 108-111).

The army of Alexander the Great resembled to the army of his father Philip.
It was composed of light and heavy troops and some engineers, medical and staff units.
About one third of the army was composed of his greek allies from the helenic league.
The main infantry corps was so called phalax which was composed of 6 regimens (taxies) numbering about 1,500 phalangites each.
Each phalangit had a lond pike called "sarissa" which was up to 18 feet long and a short sword.
For protetion the soldier had a phrigian stile helmet and a shield.
Arrian meantions a large shields (the aspis) but this issue is not so clear because it's hard to use a large pike with one hand occupied by the shield.
Many modern historians claim they use a smaller shild named "Pelta" which was used by peltasts.
It is not clear if they had body armor, but heavy body armor is mantioned in Arrian (1.28.7) and other ancient sources.
Modern historians however believe most of the phalangites didn't have a heavy body armor in the times of Alexander the Great

Another important unit is the Hypaspists (shield bearers) they were arranged into 3 batalions (lochos), each was about 1000 men strong.
One of the batalions wad named "Agema" and served as king's bodyguards.
Their armament is unknown and it's hard to get a clear clues about this matter from ancient sources.
Sometimes hypaspists are mentioned in the front line of the battle just between the phalanx and the heavy cavalry and it seams they acted like heavy infantry, on the other hand they always acompany Alexander on flanking marches, and were capable of fighting on rough terrain which is more appropriate for light troops.

Besides heavy infantry he had a lot of light infantry inits composed of peltasts, psilois and such.
Peltasts are considered to be light infantry, although they had a helmet and a small shield and were havier then the psilois.
The best peltast were the Agrians from Thrace.
The cavalry is also devided into light and heavy.
The heavy cavalry was composed of "Campanion Cavalry" which was based on macedonian nobility and Thessalian cavalry.

The Campanoin cavalry (hetairoi - friends) was divided into 8 squadrons called "ile" each 200 men srong accept the royal squadran which had 300 mouned warriors.
They were equipped with a long lance - the "Xyston" which was about 12-14 feet long and a heavy body armor.
The horses were partially claded in armor as well.
They didnt have any shields because the heavy cuiras was sufficent to save the warrior from most of the threats in the battle field.

Besides heavy cavalry his army had a light cavalry units as well.
There were the Prodomoi (runners).
They secured the wings of the army during the battle and went on reconsince missions.

Alexander the Great also known as, Alexander III, Alexander of Macedon in Greek ("Megas Alexandros")(late July, 356 BC–June 10, 323 BC), King of Macedon (336 BC-323 BC), was the most successful military commander (stratigon) of the ancient world.
He defined the terms stratigon, archigon and his efforts along with his farthers' Philip II of Macedon bring to human history the first occurrance of national identity.
The chief action to contribute to the national identity was the unification of the multiple Greek city states of Ancient Greece.
Instead of calling themselves Macedonians, Spartans, Athenean, Thracian, Pontians, Cypriots they as a consequence called themselves Greeks.
His idea of unification was not his invention as Socrates, Plato and Aristotle were instrumental in the delivery of such philosophy.
Alexanders' father was instrumental for the unification of the Greek states, and due to his thoughts of unification asked for Aristotle teh philosopher to be Alexanders' personal tutor.
By understanding the philosophy of strength through unity he maintained and propogated a unified Greek strength.
Alexanders education as a pupil of Aristotle also taught him Ethics, Science, Math, Sociology and many other topics.
"Language is the first and foremost aspect that unifies people" (Platos Republic 360BC).
By the time Alexander was 30 years of age he conquered the most powerfull empire of his time, the Persian Empire.
He restored control of ancient Greek colonies in Anatolia, including Euxinos Pontos.
Other cities he controlled were those found in Syria, Egypt, Bactria and Mesopotamia, and extended the boundaries of his own empire as far as India.
By the time Alexanders' campaign reached India his initial 10,000 men were almost depleted and was compelled to integrate non-Greeks into his army and administration.
After twelve years of constant military campaigning, Alexander died of unknown causes, probably of malaria.

His actions resulted in changes to human history that still persist today.
Through the spread of Hellenism in the East and through established Western Colonies in Hispania, Marsielles, Kolambira, Sikilia, Italic Peninsula, Hellenisation under Alexander and the succesor Kingdoms and Empires helped spread the Lingua Franca from England to India, Russia to Africa.
This being the cultural border that resulted from his military efforts.