Set in the near future, the book centres around the life of the fifteen protagonist year old Alex.
Alex and his gang roam the streets at night, committing crimes purely for enjoyment, the crimes described in the book increase in severity, from assault, to robbery, to a fight with rival gang, culminating when the gang breaks into the house of F.D.
Alexander and rape his wife.
The gang returns to a bar where Alex hits one of his gang members, Dim as punishment for Dim's rude behaviour towards a woman who was singing the chorus of Ode to Joy, classical music being Alex's other passion, apart from violence.
This sparks off a tense moment between the two gang members.

The next day, after fighting Dim and George to re-establish his control of the gang following the previous night's dispute Alex agrees, on Pete's suggestion to rob a house in a rich part of down.
Alex tries to persuade the woman living in the house to open the door.
The woman refuses and calls the police as a precaution.
He gains access to the house through a window, but is confronted by the defiant woman, who defends herself with unexpected strength, he manages to knock her out with a bust of Beethoven.
As he runs out the front door he is stuck by Dim who runs off with the rest of the gang just as the police arrive.
At the police station we learn that the woman has died.

In prison Alex hears about an experimental rehabilitation programme called "the Ludivico technique", which promises that the prisoner will be released upon completion of the two week treatment and will not commit crimes afterwards and manages to become the first patient.
The Ludivico technique itself is a form of aversion therapy, where Alex is given a drug which induces extreme nauseas while being forced to watch graphically violent films.
At the end of the treatment Alex is unable to carry out or even contemplate violent acts as doing so induces crippling nausea.

He is released from prison, but upon returning home he is rejected by is parents.
Dejected Alex contemplates suicide, going to the public library in order to discover what sort of poison he might take to end his life.
There he is spotted by one of his former victims, who accompanied by his friends extracts his revenge, unable do defend himself and calls the police for help.
The police arrive, but they turn out to be Dim, and Billy Boy, the former leader of a rival gang.
They Alex, beat him up and dump him by the side of the road out in the country.

Alex stumbles to the nearest house for help, which turn out to be that of F.D.
Alexander, whose wife Alex had raped earlier in the book.
At first Alex is not recognised as he had always worn a mask, but we discover that F.D.
Alexander is in a wheel chair and his wife died from her injuries.
Realising that Alex is the same person who had attacked him and his wife some years ago, F.D.
Alexander drugs him, locks him in a room and plays Beethoven’s 9th Symphony at full volume.
Although previously his favourite piece of music the Ninth was also used as a soundtrack for one of the films that Alex was forced to watch as part of the Ludivico treatment, hence it produces the same nauseating effects on him.
Unable to stand the pain Alex throws himself out the window to try to kill himself.
He survives the fall and wakes up in hospital informed that his tormentors have been arrested and the Ludivico treatment reversed.

The final chapter begins identically to the first, Alex having formed a new gang and reverted to his previous criminality.
But on this particular night he decides not to join them and goes for a walk on his own instead.
In a cafe he bumps into one of his old gang member Pete, who is married and has become a respectable member of society.
After conversing with Pete and his wife Alex has an epiphany, renouncing violence on one hand, but on the other realising that his behaviour was an unavoidable part of youth, and that if he had a son, he would not be able to stop him from doing what he did.

Although the book is divided into three parts, each containing seven chapters, twenty-one being a symbolic number as it was the age that which a child earns his rights at the time, the finely 21st chapter was omitted from the versions published in the US.
The film adaptation which was directed by Stanley Kubrick follows the American version of the book, ending prior the events of the 21st chapter.
Kubrick claimed that he was unaware of the non-American version of the book at the time of filming.

Part 1 involves Alex reflecting on his illegal activity.
After drinking narcotic-laden milk at the Korova Milk Bar, Alex and his droogs ridicule and beat an old librarian, tearing up his books.
drunken vagrant under a motorway flyover.
They then proceed to a run-down theater, where rival gang leader Billy Boy and his thugs are about to rape a young girl.
A fight between the two gangs ensue, with Alex and his droogs emerging victorious and leaving before the police arrive.
Alex (with the gang) steals a "Durango 95" sports car for a reckless drive into the countryside.
They then perpetrate a home invasion, savagely beating a reclusive writer named F. Alexander, tearing up his written work and raping his wife.
Afterward, back at the Korova, there is a brief moment of tension among the four when Alex strikes Dim for ridiculing a woman as she sings a classical piece.

While skipping school for the day, Alex picks up two ten-year-olds in a record shop, takes them home, and rapes them.
The earlier tension within the group deepens as Alex learns that his droogs, particularly Georgie and Dim, are no longer fully satisfied with him as their leader.
Although he is slightly threatened, he deals with the problem by beating the two, slashing the back of Dim's hand, demonstrating his leadership and unwillingness to be overthrown.
That night, the gang perpetrates another home invasion.
Alex breaks into an old woman's house and uses a small silver statue of a woman to bludgeon her into unconsciousness.
Opening the front door, he finds himself facing his three mutinous droogs; Dim nailing him in the face with his chain, blinding him briefly, and he is soon captured by the police.
While under interrogation, he learns that his robbery victim has died, thus making him a murderer.
He is then sentenced to 14 years in prison.

The other droogs, Pete and Georgie, manage to keep the peace between them.
Thus the group heads home.
Alex returns to his home at a tower block, where his mother and father have factory jobs, and climaxes the evening by listening to classical music on his expensive stereo.

After giving his mother an excuse for a need to miss school, Alex is visited by P.R.
Deltoid, the social worker assigned to his case, who has heard word about Alex's doings the previous night.
Deltoid warns Alex that if he gets in trouble again, he'll be sent to prison.
Alex assures Deltoid he won't.

Sitting down at dinner, Alex's father asks Alex about his "night job".
Alex gives him a weak excuse while giving him a generous portion of his "salary".
The earlier tension within the group deepens however, as Alex finds his droogs waiting for him at his house.
Alex learns that his droogs, particularly Georgie and Dim, are no longer fully satisfied with him as their leader, suggesting a "new way", and that they should drink "moloko plus" before they discuss it.
Although he is slightly threatened, he deals with the problem by, without the edge of "moloko plus", beating the two, slashing Dim's wrist, demonstrating his leadership and unwillingness to be overthrown.

After leaving, Alex and his droogs ridicule and beat an old drunken vagrant, steal a Durango '95 sports car for a reckless drive into the countryside and finally end up at HOME.
That is, the name of the home that belongs to a reclusive writer named F. Alexander.
The gang use their cunning and force to invade the house, savagely beating the writer, tearing up his written work (entitled "A Clockwork Orange") and raping his wife.
Afterward, back at the Korova, there is a moment of tension among the four when Alex strikes Dim for ridiculing a woman as she sings a classical piece that moved Alex.
The other droogs, Pete and Georgie, manage to keep the peace between them.
Thus the group heads home.
Alex returns to his home at a tower block, where his mother and father have factory jobs, and climaxes the evening by listening to classical music on his expensive stereo.

The following morning, after giving his mother an excuse for a need to miss school, Alex is visited by P.R.
Deltoid, the social worker assigned to his case, who has heard word about Alex's doings the previous night.
Deltoid warns Alex that if he gets in trouble again, he'll be sent to prison.
Alex assures Deltoid he won't.
While skipping school, Alex picks up two girls as young as ten in a record shop, takes them home, and has sex with them both by getting them intoxicated.
Sitting down at dinner, Alex's father asks his son about his "night job".
Alex gives him a weak excuse, and then a generous portion of his "salary" to compensate.
The earlier tension within Alex's gang deepens however, as Alex finds his droogs waiting for him outside his house.
Alex learns that his droogs, particularly Georgie and Dim, are no longer fully satisfied with him as their leader, suggesting a "new way", and that they should drink "moloko plus" before they discuss it.
Although he is slightly threatened, he deals with the problem by fighting and beating the two, slashing Dim's wrist and demonstrating his leadership and unwillingness to be overthrown.
That night, the gang perpetrates another home invasion.
When confronted by the owner, an elderly woman, Alex strikes her with a medium sized art sculpture, apparantly rendering her unconcious.
He soon hears police sirens, and attempts to flee.
His droogs seize their opportunity to betray Alex, however, smashing a bottle of milk across his face, leaving his vision temporarily impaired and unable to escape from the police who arive shortly thereafter.
P.R.
Deltoid, although unsurprised, is disappointed by Alex's arrest.
So much so that he spits in Alex's face.
Soon after his interrogation, Alex learns that the woman he struck with the statue died as a result of her injuries.
Alex is convicted for her murder and sentenced to fourteen years in prison.
After enduring prison life for 2 years, Alex gets a job as an assistant to the prison chaplain.
He feigns an interest in religion, and amuses himself by reading the Bible for its lurid descriptions of "the old yahoodies (Jews) tolchocking (beating) each other", imagining himself taking part in "the nailing-in" (the Crucifixion) of Jesus.
Alex learns of his ex-droog Georgie's death by an intended victim during a botched robbery.
He also hears about an experimental rehabilitation program called "the Ludovico technique", which promises that the prisoner will be released upon completion of the two-week treatment and, as a result, will not commit any crimes afterwards.

After helping to kill (although accidentally) a fellow prisoner in his cell, Alex is selected to become the subject in the first full-scale trial of the Ludovico Technique.
The technique itself is a form of aversion therapy, in which Alex is given a drug that induces extreme nausea while being forced to watch graphically violent films for two weeks.
Strapped into a seat, his head clamped and his eyes held open with specula, Alex has no choice but to watch the films.
One of the films has a soundtrack of Alex's beloved Beethoven's Ninth Symphony, and though he pleads with them to remove the music, they refuse, saying that it is for his own good and that the music may be the "punishment element".

A few weeks later, he is presented to prison and government officials as a successfully rehabilitated member of society and released.
The treatment has left him unable to perform, or even think about, any kind of violent action without becoming severely ill.
He soon learns just how well it worked when he finds he cannot even defend himself against an attacker when necessary.
The clinicians demonstrate the treatment's effectiveness in front of an audience, including the prison chaplain who was opposed to Alex's "treatment": a man taunts and abuses Alex who is rendered helpless to defend himself, as each time he tries he becomes nauseated.
Then a beautiful, naked woman is shown to him, but Alex is unable to think of touching her without feeling ill.
The third part of the novel centers on Alex's life after he is released from prison.
Alex encounters many of his former victims, all of whom seek revenge upon him.
He finds himself powerless to defend himself against them, as the Ludovico treatment leaves him ill when he attempts violence.
Alex returns home, joyful at the thought of starting afresh.
However, he is unpleasantly surprised by the discovery that his parents have rented out his room to a lodger named Joe, essentially "replacing" their son.
With no place to go, stripped of the ability to fight back, Alex despondently wanders London.
He stops at the Korova Milk Bar and drinks euphoria-inducing milk, something he has never done before, and then to the music store for some classical music.
However, in an unintended side effect, the technique has also rendered him incapable of listening to his beloved classical music, and he runs screaming from the store.
Alex decides to commit suicide, but is unable to because the technique prevents him from committing any act of violence, including against himself.
He wanders into the public library, only to be quickly recognized by the elderly librarian whom he had beaten up with his droogs in chapter one.
With his librarian friends, he attacks and beats on Alex.
The police, called by the librarian, turn out to be his old ex-'droog' Dim, and old arch-enemy Billy Boy.
Taking advantage of their positions (which apparently permits summary punishment), they take Alex to the town's edge, beat him and leave him for dead.

Alex falls into the hands of Mr. Alexander, the husband of the woman he raped at the beginning of part one.
Mr. Alexander was apparently crippled in the initial assault and is now confined to a wheelchair, and his wife is now deceased, due to an illness he blames on the rape.
Since Alex was wearing a Disraeli mask during the earlier assault, Alexander does not recognize him as the attacker.
Recognizing Alex's photo from the newspaper, Mr. Alexander's political activist friends decide to use him as a weapon against the government by turning him into a poster child for the victims of fascism; they play classical music in the room beside his, triggering the maddening effect of the Ludovico treatment.
Driven to insanity by the music, Alex jumps from his bedroom window in an attempt to end his life.

In the final chapter, Alex finds himself half-heartedly preparing for yet another night of crime with a new trio of droogs.
After a chance encounter with Pete, who has reformed and married, Alex finds himself taking less and less pleasure in acts of senseless violence.
He begins contemplating giving up crime himself to become a productive member of society and start a family of his own, while reflecting on the notion that his own children will be just as destructive-- if not more so-- than he himself.
The book is divided into three parts, each containing seven chapters.