In heavier-than-air aircraft, we can discern two major ways to produce the lift: aerodynamic lift and engine lift.
In the case of aerodynamic lift, the aircraft is kept in the air because of aerodynamics, usually by means of wings of some kind.
With engine lift, the aircraft defeats gravity by sheer engine power.

In a "conventional" configuration, the lift surfaces is placed in front of a control surface; for example by having steering flaps at the rear end of a wing.
The number of lift surfaces varied greatly in the past, as biplanes (two wings) and triplanes (three wings) were numerous in the early days of aviation.
Currently, most planes are monoplanes.

Other possibilities include the delta-wing, where lift and horizontal control surfaces are combined and the flying wing, where there is no separate vertical control surface (f.e.
the B-2).
A variable geometry ('swing-wing') is also possible.

A second large category among aerodynamically lifted aircraft are the rotary wing aircraft.
Here, the lift is provided by fastly rotating rotors.
The best known example of this category is the helicopter (which was preceded by the autogyro), but also the tiltrotor aircraft ( such as the V-22 Osprey) and the hovercraft belong in this category.

The first military aircraft were used for reconnaissance and surveillance in World War I.
Soon it was invented that is was possible to use them for attacking the ground as well, and the first bombers were born.
In order to prevent the enemy from bombing, fighter aircraft were developed to intercept and shoot down enemy aircraft.

Later, trainers were developed for the purpose of instructing new pilots.
The use of transport aircraft allowed for moving of cargo, troops and evacuation; these were also used to drop paratroopers.
Tankers are used to refuel plane in mid-air.

Commercial aviation can be divided in passenger transport and cargo transport.
For the former, large planes have been developed that can transport up to 500 passengers over large distances.
The cargo aircraft are often the same or similar to the military transport aircraft.

In heavier-than-air aircraft, we can discern two major ways to produce the lift: aerodynamic lift and engine lift.
In the case of aerodynamic lift, the aircraft is kept in the air because of aerodynamics, usually by means of wings of some kind.
With engine lift, the aircraft defeats gravity by sheer engine power.

In a "conventional" configuration, the lift surfaces are placed in front of a control surface or tailplane.
The number of lift surfaces varied greatly in the pre-1950 period, as biplanes (two wings) and triplanes (three wings) were numerous in the early days of aviation.
Subsequently most planes are monoplanes.

Other possibilities include the delta-wing, where lift and horizontal control surfaces are combined and the flying wing, where there is no separate vertical control surface (f.e.
the B-2).
A variable geometry ('swing-wings') have also been employed in a few examples of combat aircraft (the F-111, Tornado and B-1 Lancer).

A second large category of aerodynamically lifted aircraft are the rotary wing aircraft.
Here, the lift is provided by rotating rotors.
The best known examples of this category are the helicopter, the earlier autogyro), and the tiltrotor aircraft (such as the V-22 Osprey).

The first military aircraft were used for reconnaissance and surveillance in World War I.
Soon they were adapted for attacking the ground or enemy vehicles/ships/guns/aircraft as well, and the first bombers were born.
In order to prevent the enemy from bombing, fighter aircraft were developed to intercept and shoot down enemy aircraft.

Eventually two seater trainers were developed for the purpose of instructing new pilots.
The use of transport aircraft enabled the rapid movement of supplies, ammunition, cargo, troops and also casualty evacuation; transport aircraft were also used to drop paratroopers.
Tankers are used to refuel planes in mid-air, thus increasing their operational range.

Commercial aviation can be divided in passenger transport and cargo transport.
For the former, large planes have been developed that can transport up to 500 passengers over large distances.
Commercial cargo aircraft are often similar to military transport aircraft, or might be adapted from the passenger fleets of an earlier era.

Aeroplanes generally use an internal-combustion engine in the form of a piston engine (with a propeller) or a turbine engine (jet or turboprop), to provide thrust that moves the craft forward through the air.

A further category might encompass the wing-in-ground-effect types, for example the Russian ekranoplan also nicknamed the "Caspian Sea Monster".
Man-powered aircraft also rely on ground effect to remain airborne.
(Hovercraft are not considered to be aircraft, since they rely wholly on the pressure of air on the ground beneath.)


Civil aviation broadly divides into commercial and general activities, however there can be some overlap in practice.
Commercial aviation includes both scheduled and charter airline flights.
General aviation is a catch-all covering other kinds of private and commercial use.

These aircraft are one-off specials, built to explore some aspect of aircraft design and with no other useful purpose.
A model aircraft is a small copy of some larger aircraft design.
Models may be made to fly for fun, for static display, or for serious aerodynamic research (cf Reynolds number).
Within any general category, aircraft are usually listed according to manufacturer and production type.Aircraft generate considerable amounts of noise pollution and airpollution emissions  Since the 1960s the U S Environmental Protection Agency has developed emissions factors for the most commonly used aircraft; in 1972 the Federal Aviation Admonistration developed a computer model for prediction of air pollution concentrationsqs produced by aircraft in flight A number of future aircraft development projects are under way, ranging from relatively simple aerodynamic enhancements (e.g addition of winglets) to the development of new engine technologies (e.g. Pratt and Whitney's Geared Turbofan) to all-new designs such as the Blended Wing-Body.

Heavier-than-air aircraft must find some way to push air or gas downwards, so that a reaction occurs (by Newton's laws of motion) to push the aircraft upwards.
This dynamic movement through the air is the origin of the term aerodyne.
There are two ways to produce dynamic upthrust: aerodynamic lift, and powered lift in the form of engine thrust.

Aerodynamic lift is the most common, with aeroplanes kept in the air by the forward movement of wings, and rotorcraft by spinning wing-shaped rotors.
A wing is a flat, horizontal surface, usually shaped in cross-section as an aerofoil.
To fly it must move forwards through the air; this movement of air over the aerofoil shape deflects air downward to create an equal and opposite upward force, called lift, according to Newton's third law of motion.

With powered lift, the aircraft directs its engine thrust vertically downwards.
A pure rocket is not usually regarded as an aerodyne, because it does not depend on the air for its lift (and can even fly into space), however many aerodynamic lift vehicles have been powered or assisted by rocket motors.
Rocket-powered missiles which obtain aerodynamic lift at very high speed due to airflow over their bodies, are a marginal case.

The initialism VTOL (vertical take off and landing) is applied to aircraft that can take off and land vertically.
Most are rotorcraft.
Others, such as the Hawker Siddeley Harrier, take off and land vertically using powered lift and transfer to aerodynamic lift in steady flight.
STOL stands for short take off and landing.

Sometimes two or more wings are stacked one above the other.
A biplane has two wings, and a triplane has three.
The biplane allows a lighter structure than the single-winged monoplane.
Up until the 1930's, biplanes were the most common.
Triplanes were only occasionally made, especially for a brief period during the First World War due to their high manoeuvrability.
Since the Second World War, most aeroplanes have been monoplanes.
A sesquiplane is similar to a biplane, but with the lower wing much reduced in size.

Most low-speed aeroplanes have a straight wing.
For flight near or above the speed of sound, a swept wing is usually used, where the wing angles backwards towards the tips (though forward sweep is occasionally experimented with).
A notable variation is the delta wing, which is shaped like a triangle: the leading edge is sharply swept, but the trailing edge is straight; an especially graceful form this is the double-curved ogival delta found on Concorde.
Another variation is the crescent wing, seen for example on the Handley Page Victor, which is sharply swept inboard, with reduced sweep for the outboard section.

In a tail-less aeroplane the lift and horizontal control surfaces are combined.
The ultimate expression of this is the flying wing, where there is no central fuselage, and perhaps even no separate vertical control surface (e.g., the B-2 Spirit).
The reverse of this is the lifting body, where the aeroplane's fuselage is shaped to provide aerodynamic lift.

Some people consider wing-in-ground-effect vehicles to be aeroplanes, others do not.
These craft "fly" close to the surface of the ground or water.
An example is the Russian ekranoplan also nicknamed the "Caspian Sea Monster".

Alexander Graham Bell, who vacationed most of his life in Nova Scotia, Canada, received a US patent (#7,789) for the telephone in 1877.
Bell assigned 75% of the Canadian patent rights to his father, Melville Bell, who, with a friend, Reverend Thomas Henderson, leased pairs of wooden hand telephones for use on private lines constructed by the client from, for example, a store to a nearby warehouse or from a business to an executive's residence.
In 1879 Melville Bell sold the rights to National Bell Telephone Company in Boston, Massachusetts, USA, and thus officially became one of the first regional operating companies of what was to become the Bell System.
Charles Fleetford Sise, a Chicago businessman, was brought in as general manager, and The Bell Telephone Company of Canada Ltd. was founded in 1880.
With a government-granted monopoly on Canadian long-distance telephone service, The Bell Telephone Company serviced 237,000 subscribers by 1914.

During the late 19th century, Bell sold its Atlantic operations in the three Maritime provinces, but acquired interests in all Atlantic companies during the early 1960s.
It held interests in the parents of NBTel, Island Telecom, NewTel, and MTT.
These four companies later merged into Aliant in the late 1990s, in which Bell continues to own a stake.

Independent companies appeared in many areas of Ontario, Quebec and the Maritime provinces without adequate Bell Canada service.
Bell went on during the 20th century to acquire most of the independent companies in Ontario and Quebec.
Quebec, however, still has large swaths of relatively rural areas served by Telus and Télébec as well as some 20 small independent companies.
As of 1980, Ontario still had some 30 independent companies, and Bell has not acquired any; the smaller ones were sold to larger independents with larger capital resources.

The three prairie provinces, at separate times up to 1912, acquired Bell Canada operations and formed provincial utility services, investing to develop proper telephone services throughout those provinces; Bell Canada's investment in the prairies had been scant or insufficient relative to growth.
Having achieved a high level of development, Manitoba moved to privatize its telephone utility and Alberta privatized Alberta Government Telephones to create Telus in the 1990s.
Saskatchewan continues to own SaskTel as a crown corporation.
Edmonton was served by a city-owned utility that was sold to Telus of Alberta in the 1990s.

Although Bell Canada entered the Northwest Territories with an exchange at Iqaluit (then known as Frobisher Bay, in the territory now known as Nunavut) in 1958, Canadian National Telecommunications, a subsidiary of Canadian National Railways, provided most of the telephone service in Canada's northern territories.
CNR created Northwestel in 1979, and Bell Canada Enterprises acquired the company in 1988 as a wholly owned subsidiary.
Bell Canada sold its 22 exchanges in the eastern region of the NWT to Northwestel in 1992, and BCE transferred ownership of the company to Bell Canada in 1999.

Alexander Graham Bell, who vacationed most of his life in Nova Scotia, Canada, received a US patent (#7,789) for the telephone in 1877.
Bell assigned 75% of the Canadian patent rights to his father, Melville Bell, who, with a friend, Reverend Thomas Henderson, leased pairs of wooden hand telephones for use on private lines constructed by the client from, for example, a store to a nearby warehouse or from a business to an executive's residence.
In 1879 Melville Bell sold the rights to National Bell Telephone Company in Boston, Massachusetts, USA, and thus officially became one of the first regional operating companies of what was to become the Bell System.
Charles Fleetford Sise, a Chicago businessman, was brought in as general manager, and The Bell Telephone Company of Canada Ltd. was founded in 1880.
With a government-granted monopoly on Canadian long-distance telephone service, The Bell Telephone Company serviced 237,000 subscribers by 1914.

During the late 19th century, Bell sold its Atlantic operations in the three Maritime provinces, but acquired interests in all Atlantic companies during the early 1960s.
It held interests in the parents of NBTel, Island Telecom, NewTel, and MTT.
These four companies later merged into Aliant in the late 1990s, in which Bell continues to own a stake.

Independent companies appeared in many areas of Ontario, Quebec and the Maritime provinces without adequate Bell Canada service.
Bell went on during the 20th century to acquire most of the independent companies in Ontario and Quebec.
Quebec, however, still has large swaths of relatively rural areas served by Telus and Télébec as well as some 20 small independent companies.
As of 1980, Ontario still had some 30 independent companies, and Bell has not acquired any; the smaller ones were sold to larger independents with larger capital resources.

The three prairie provinces, at separate times up to 1912, acquired Bell Canada operations and formed provincial utility services, investing to develop proper telephone services throughout those provinces; Bell Canada's investment in the prairies had been scant or insufficient relative to growth.
Having achieved a high level of development, Manitoba moved to privatize its telephone utility and Alberta privatized Alberta Government Telephones to create Telus in the 1990s.
Saskatchewan continues to own SaskTel as a crown corporation.
Edmonton was served by a city-owned utility that was sold to Telus of Alberta in the 1990s.

Although Bell Canada entered the Northwest Territories with an exchange at Iqaluit (then known as Frobisher Bay, in the territory now known as Nunavut) in 1958, Canadian National Telecommunications, a subsidiary of Canadian National Railways, provided most of the telephone service in Canada's northern territories.
CNR created Northwestel in 1979, and Bell Canada Enterprises acquired the company in 1988 as a wholly owned subsidiary.
Bell Canada sold its 22 exchanges in the eastern region of the NWT to Northwestel in 1992, and BCE transferred ownership of the company to Bell Canada in 1999.

In aerodynamics, the flight envelope or performance envelope of an aircraft refers to the capabilities of a design in terms of airspeed and load factor or altitude.
The term is somewhat loosely applied, and can also refer to other measurements such as maneuverability.
When a plane is pushed, for instance by diving it at high speeds, it is said to be flown "outside the envelope", something considered rather dangerous.

Flight envelope is one of a number of related terms that are all used in a similar fashion.
It is perhaps the most common term because it is the oldest, first being used in the early days of test flying.
It is closely related to more modern terms known as extra power and a doghouse plot which are different ways of describing a flight envelope.
The maximal total range is the distance an aircraft can fly between takeoff and landing, as limited by fuel capacity in powered aircraft, or cross-country speed and environmental conditions in unpowered aircraft.

Ferry range means the maximum range the aircraft can fly.
This usually means maximum fuel load, optionally with extra fuel tanks and minimum equipment.
It refers to transport of aircraft for use on remote location.

The fuel time limit for powered aircraft is fixed by the fuel load and rate of consumption.
When all fuel is consumed, the engines stop and the aircraft will lose its propulsion.
For unpowered aircraft, the maximum flight time is variable, limited by available daylight hours, weather conditions, and pilot endurance.

Aerospace engineers develop control systems for a vehicle's orientation (attitude) about its center of mass.
The control systems include actuators, which exert forces in various directions, and generate rotational forces or moments about the aerodynamic center of the aircraft, and thus rotate the aircraft in pitch, roll, or yaw.
For example, a pitching moment is a vertical force applied at a distance forward or aft from the aerodynamic center of the aircraft, causing the aircraft to pitch up or down.

Roll, pitch and yaw refer to rotations about the respective axes starting from a defined equilibrium state.
The equilibrium roll angle is known as wings level or zero bank angle, equivalent to a level heeling angle on a ship.
Yaw is known as "heading".
The equilibrium pitch angle in submarine and airship parlance is known as "trim", but in aircraft, this usually refers to angle of attack, rather than orientation.
However, common usage ignores this distinction between equilibrium and dynamic cases.

The most common aeronautical convention defines the roll as acting about the longitudinal axis, positive with the starboard (right) wing down.
The yaw is about the vertical body axis, positive with the nose to starboard.
Pitch is about an axis perpendicular to the longitudinal plane of symmetry, positive nose up.

A fixed-wing aircraft increases or decreases the lift generated by the wings when it pitches nose up or down by increasing or decreasing the angle of attack (AOA).
The roll angle is also known as bank angle on a fixed wing aircraft, which usually "banks" to change the horizontal direction of flight.
An aircraft is usually streamlined from nose to tail to reduce drag making it typically advantageous to keep the sideslip angle near zero, though there are instances when an aircraft may be deliberately "sideslipped" for example a slip in a fixed wing aircraft.