By 1820, however, skyrocketing demand for cotton, driven by the industrial revolution, made cotton plantations, and slavery, enormously profitable, interrupting the progress of gradual emancipation in the South, just as the same industrial revolution was driving vast economic and social change in the northern States, which had already successfully ended slavery.
In the southern States, where slavery persisted and, indeed, burgeoned, and especially in those areas where cotton plantations were prevalent, a reactionary political interest in defending slavery as an institution, developed, after 1820.
Liberal political philosophies and religious convictions regarding social progress combined, in the rest of the country, to produce a small, but vigorous antislavery movement committed to abolition, and a general opinion hostile to slavery.

In 1819, when a northern congressman suggested that Missouri enter the Union, committed to gradual emancipation of its slaves, a firestorm of controversy was ignited, which ended with the Missouri Compromise, admitting Missouri as a slave State, but forbidding slavery in the remainder of the Louisiana Purchase territory, north of Missouri's southern boundary.
The controversy served to illuminate the role of the Senate, where the number of Senators from slave States and free States was exactly balanced, in maintaining the interests of the pro-slavery forces, who were easily bested in the House of Representatives, which the more populous northern States dominated.
The Missouri Compromise also admitted Maine as a State, to balance Missouri in the Senate.

The political structure, laid down by the U.S. Constitution, left ambiguous the relationship of the individual States to the Federal government.
Although the Constitution declared the Federal government "supreme" within areas of Federal responsibility, it left the States almost entirely independent of the Federal government, and vice versa.
The Federal government was not dependent on the States, fiscally, and, having its own employees and officials, operated as independently as the States.
State governments were established by State constitutions, and the politics of their governance was only loosely related to the national politics of Federal governance.

Politicians with a secure political base at the State, but not the Federal (or "national") level, had an incentive to challenge Federal power with State power, and such controversies kept alive a thread of political thought, originating in Anti-Federalist opposition to ratification of the U.S. Constitution, which sought to circumscribe centralized, Federal power with local, State power.
Many controversies, major and minor, in the early years of the Constitution, were framed as questions about the extent of Federal authority, granted but limited by the Constitution, and as conflicts between the Federal government and States, independently asserting their authority.
In the 1820's, just as a nationalist Supreme Court, led by John Marshall and Joseph Story, was solidifying the legal precedents and legal opinions, undergirding the Nationalist interpretation of Federal supremacy, the States' Rights ideology, which argued for the independent power of the States and circumscription of the Federal government's authority, was adopted by John C. Calhoun, as he became the leader of the reactionary, pro-slavery forces.

In 1832, Calhoun precipitated the Nullification Crisis, in protest against the high rates of the Federal tariff.
Calhoun prompted his own State of South Carolina, to assert a State power to "nullify" the Federal tariff, within its own bounds, which was met by President Jackson, threatening military enforcement of Federal law.
The crisis was resolved by a revision of the tariff, but Calhoun succeeded in impressing southerners with the need for some power countervailing whatever majority controlled the Federal government, as well as the notion that "southern" interests could conflict with "northern" interests in a vital way.
In subsequent years, "nullification" would fade as a doctrine, in favor of "secession": State action to withdraw the State entirely from Federal jurisdiction, by repealing the State's ratification of, or assent to, the U.S. Constitution.
The threat of secession would be used by reactionary, pro-slavery forces as both a lever in national politics, to obtain concessions from a reluctant majority, and as an organizing principle for the project of creating an independent Southern Republic, where slavery would be secure.

The generation of politicians, who came to national prominence during and after the War of 1812, were nationalists, and inclined to devise compromises to hold the country together.
The two political parties, which took shape in the aftermath of Andrew Jackson's rise to the Presidency were both national in scope and ambition, and helped to resolve regional differences in interest in favor of coherent national policies of compromise and cooperation.
Slavery questions, with their strong regional cleavage, threatened both national political parties.
Minor political parties, often with an antislavery agenda, emerged repeatedly in the 1840's and early 1850's, as both parties shed supporters over slavery questions.

After the Mexican War, interest in Western expansion exacerbated tensions over slavery, as southerners felt frustrated in their attempts to find additional areas in which to form slave States, to balance the prospect of additional free States in the West.
The admission of California as a free State, in the Compromise of 1850, pushed them toward desperation, while an onerous and unfair fugitive slave law, included in the same Compromise of 1850, alarmed antislavery activists.
Pro-slavery interests appeared to gain effective control over the Democratic Party, while the Whig Party fell apart.
The nationalist generation of politicians, of the War of 1812 -- men like Thomas Hart Benton, Henry Clay, Lewis Cass, Daniel Webster, John C. Calhoun -- left the political stage, with the Compromise of 1850.
With the Whigs practically disbanded, the Democrats easily elected the President in 1852 and 1856, but the men they could nominate were weak northerners of few convictions and less ability.
The lackluster presidencies of Franklin Pierce and James Buchanan: Widely considered as two of the most unproductive presidents in United States history, did little to cool the flames of war, which were beginning to flare up.

The Democratic Party's formula for a national consensus on slavery, adopted in the Presidential contest of 1848, was known as "popular sovereignty" and stated as a principle, the idea that the people of a territory organizing a new State should be free to democratically choose whether to institute slavery.
In 1854, the Democrats pushed through Congress, the Kansas-Nebraska Act, including a repeal of the Missouri Compromise, in order to give "popular sovereignty" a trial in Kansas.
The competition to "capture" Kansas gave rise to an often violent conflict known as Bleeding Kansas, and a variety of fraudulent political maneuvers aimed at getting Kansas admitted with the pro-slavery Lecompton State constitution.
Opposition to the Democrats on this issue resulted in the formation of the Republican Party, on antislavery principles; the Republicans were quickly able to combine antislavery Democrats with the shards of various third parties and a great many former Whigs, outside of the South.

An attempt by a pro-slavery majority on the Supreme Court in 1857 to close the door on legal, antislavery agitation, in the case of Dred Scott only served to further alarm the Republicans.
The increasingly inflammatory rhetoric of the Republicans, in turn, further alarmed southerners, who demanded the "rights" granted them by the Supreme Court.
A continuing series of dramatic incidents, including the caning of Charles Sumner on the floor of the Senate and the raid by John Brown on Harper's Ferry, continued to inflame passions.

Frustrated in their attempts to bring in Kansas as a slave State, pro-slavery interests in Congress quietly opposed a number of measures related to western expansion, including free Homesteading, a trans-continental railroad and land subsidies to State colleges, which policies were wildly popular in the northern States.
The inability of northern Democrats to deliver on these projects, despite the leadership of Stephen A. Douglas, weakened the northern Democratic party's credibility as the party of western expansion.
The Republican Party united and campaigned on the single principle of opposition to further expansion of slavery, that is, the legalization of slavery or formation of new Slave states in the Western territories.
By implication, the Republicans were opposed to the southern "Slavepower" political interest group, which had seemed to control the Democratic Party at critical moments in the 1840's and 1850's, and which was believed to be hindering popular measures related to western expansion.
Thus, the Republican Party created a political alliance of those opposed to slavery on moral and ideological grounds with those enthusiastic about the project of building a modern industrial, continental nation.

The election campaign of 1860 developed into a four-way race, as the Democratic Party split, with one faction supporting Stephen A. Douglas, a fiercely nationalist Senator from Illinois and the author of both the Compromise of 1850 and the Kansas-Nebraska Act, and another, predominantly southern faction, supporting John C. Breckinridge, Vice-President and later, a Kentucky Senator, and later still a Confederate] Major General and Secretary of War.
A conservative and aging remnant of the Whig Party formed as the Constitutional Union party, and tried to take no position on slavery.
The Republican Party nominated Abraham Lincoln, a moderate opponent of slavery on moral grounds, but not an abolitionist.

In the northern States, the contest was mostly between Douglas and Lincoln, although President Buchanan's enmity toward Douglas led him to support Breckinridge, which divided the Democratic vote in some northern States.
In the southern States, the contest was mostly between the Constitutional Union candidate, John Bell and Breckinridge.
Lincoln did not personally campaign, as was customary, but Douglas, breaking with tradition, did.
After the outcome became clear to Douglas, he campaigned in southern States, preaching and warning against disunion.

Lincoln won a majority of the Electoral College, with a plurality of the popular vote, by winning every free State, except New Jersey; Lincoln's Republican Party was not even on the ballot in most southern States.
Although the emergence of a third party has affected the outcome in many other cases in U.S. Presidential electoral history, the presence of four parties in 1860, did not clearly determine the outcome; Lincoln won popular majorities in 15 States, enough to carry the Electoral College.

For many years, compromises had been made to balance the number of free states and slave states so that there would be a balance in the Senate.
The last slave state admitted was Texas in 1845, with five free states admitted since then.
Kansas's admission as a slave state had recently been blocked, and it was due to enter as a free state instead in 1861.
The South seemed to have permanently lost the balance of power in the Senate and the House of Representatives had long been controlled by free states.
The slave states were facing a future as a perpetual minority after decades of nearly continuous control of the presidency and the Congress.

Being in a permanent minority position, the southern states could not prevent high protective tariffs being imposed on imports of goods that competed with Northern manufacturing.
In May of 1860 the U. S. Congress passed the Morrill Tariff Bill raising the average tariff from about 15% to 37% with increases to 47% within three years.
This was reminiscent and even higher than the Tariffs of Abomination of 1828 and 1832, which had led to a constitutional crisis and threats of secession and armed force.
While the tariff protected Northern industrial interests, it raised the cost of living and commerce in the South substantially.
It also reduced the trade value of their agricultural exports to Europe.
These combined to place a severe economic hardship on many Southern states.
The measure had not passed the Senate yet and became an issue supported by the Republicans in the election of 1860.
It was passed in the new session, and was among the last bills signed by President Buchanan.

The immediate trigger for war was the election of the Republican candidate for President in 1860, Abraham Lincoln, a moderate antislavery politician pledged to do all he could to oppose "slavery expansion" – that is, the admission of additional slave states to the Union from the territories – but who also said he did not believe the federal government had the power to abolish slavery in the states in which it already existed.
The slave states expected increasing hostility to their "peculiar institution".
They mistrusted Lincoln when he said he had no intention of abolishing slavery in existing states, and also were mindful that many other Republicans were intent on complete abolition of slavery.
Lincoln even encouraged abolitionists with his "House divided" speech, though Lincoln likely saw the eventual end of slavery coming about gradually by compensating slave-owners and resettling the former slaves.

He left Maj. Gen. William Tecumseh Sherman in command of most of the western armies.
Grant understood the concept of total war and believed, along with Lincoln and Sherman, that only the utter defeat of Confederate forces and their economic base would bring an end to the war.
He devised a coordinated strategy that would strike at the heart of Confederacy from multiple directions: Grant, Meade, and Benjamin Butler against Lee near Richmond; Franz Sigel in the Shenandoah Valley; Sherman to invade Georgia and capture Atlanta; Nathaniel Banks to capture Mobile, Alabama.

After two failed attempts (under Sigel and David Hunter) to seize key points in the Shenandoah Valley, Grant finally found a commander, Philip Sheridan, aggressive enough to prevail.
Sheridan was sent as a result of a raid by Jubal Early, whose corps reached the outer defenses of Washington, scaring the government, before withdrawing back to the Valley.
Sheridan defeated Early in a series of battles, decisively at Cedar Creek, and proceeded to destroy the agricultural and industrial base of the Valley, similar to tactics Sherman would use in Georgia.

Meanwhile, Sherman marched from Chattanooga to Atlanta, Georgia, defeating Generals Joseph E. Johnston and John B.
Hood.
The capture of Atlanta on September 2, 1864, was a significant factor in re-electing Abraham Lincoln.
Leaving Atlanta, he laid waste to much of the rest of Georgia in what has been called Sherman's March to the Sea, reaching the sea at Savannah, Georgia in December, 1864.
Burning towns and plantations as they went, Sherman's armies hauled off crops and killed livestock to retaliate and to deny use of these economic assets to the Confederacy, a consequence of Grant's total war doctrine.

Though geographically isolated from the battles to the east, a number of military actions took place in the Trans-Mississippi theater - a region encompassing states and territories to the west of the Mississippi River.
In 1861 Confederates launched a successful campaign into the territory of present day Arizona and New Mexico.
Residents in the southern portions of this territory adopted a secession ordinance of their own and requested that Confederate forces stationed in nearby Texas assist them in removing Union forces still stationed there.
The Confederate territory of Arizona was proclaimed by Col. John Baylor after victories at Mesilla, New Mexico and the capture of several union forces.
Confederate troops were unsuccessful in attempts to press northward in the territory and withdrew from Arizona completely in 1862 as Union reinforcements arrived from California.

The Union mounted several attempts to capture the trans-mississippi regions of Texas and Louisiana from 1862 until the war's end.
With ports to the east under blockade or capture, Texas in particular became a blockade-running haven.
Referred to as the "back door" of the Confederacy, Texas and western Louisiana continued to provide cotton crops that were transferred over land to Matamoros, Mexico and shipped to Europe in exchange for supplies.
Determined to close this trade, the Union mounted several invasion attempts of Texas, each of them unsuccessful.
Confederate victories at Galveston, Texas and the Battle of Sabine Pass repulsed invasion forces.
The Union's disastrous Red River Campaign in Western Louisiana including a defeat at the Battle of Mansfield effectively ended the north's final invasion attempt of the region until the Confederacy's surrender.
Isolated from events in the east, the Civil War continued in the Trans-Mississippi theater for several months after Robert E. Lee's surrender.
The last battle of the war occurred at Palmetto Ranch in southern Texas - ironically a confederate victory.

Because of the Confederacy's attempt to create a new state, recognition and support from the European powers were critical to its prospects.
The Union, under Secretary of State William Henry Seward attempted to block the Confederacy's efforts in this sphere.
The Confederates hoped that the importance of the cotton trade to Europe and shortages caused by the war, along with early military victories, would enable them to peel off increasing European support and force a turn away from neutrality.

Lincoln's decision to announce a blockade of the Confederacy, a clear act of war, enabled Britain, followed by other European powers, to announce their neutrality in the dispute.
This enabled to Confederacy to begin to attempt to gain support and funds in Europe.
Jefferson Davis had picked Robert Toombs of Georgia as his first Secretary of State.
Toombs, having little knowledge in foreign affairs, was replaced several months later by Robert M. T. Hunter of Virginia, another choice with little suitability.
Ultimately, on March 17, 1862, Jefferson selected Judah P. Benjamin of Louisiana as Secretary of State, who although having more international knowledge and legal experience with international slavery disputes still failed in the end to create a dynamic foreign policy for the Confederacy.

The first attempts to achieve European recognition of the Confederacy were dispatched on February 25, 1861 and led by William Lowndes Yancey, Pierre A. Rost, and Ambrose Dudley Mann.
The British foreign minister Lord John Russell met with them, and the French foreign minister Edouard Thouvenel received the group unofficially.
However, at this point the two countries had agreed to coordinate and cooperate and would not make any rash moves.

Charles Francis Adams proved particularly adept as ambassador to Britain for the Union, and Britain was reluctant to boldly challenge the Union's blockade.
The Confederacy also attempted to initiate propaganda in Europe through journalists Henry Hotze and Edwin De Leon in Paris and London.
However, public opinion against slavery created a political liability for European politicians, especially in Britain.
A significant challenge in Anglo-Union relations was also created by the Trent Affair, involving the Union boarding of a British mail steamer to seize James M. Mason and John Slidell, Confederate diplomats sent to Europe.
However, the Union was able to smooth over the problem to some degree.

As the war continued, in late 1862, the British considered initiating an attempt to mediate the conflict.
However, the unclear result of the Battle of Antietam caused them to delay this decision.
Additionally, the issuing of the Emancipation Proclamation, although seen as a desperate act, further reinforced the political liability of supporting the Confederacy.
As the war continued, the Confederacy's chances with Britain grew more hopeless, and they focused increasingly on France.
Napoléon proposed to offer mediation in January 1863, but this was dismissed by Seward.
Despite some sympathy for the Confederacy, ultimately, France's own concerns in Mexico deterred them from substantially antagonizing the Union.
As the Confederacy's situation grew more and more tenuous and their pleas increasingly ignored, in November 1864 Jefferson sent Duncan F. Kenner to Europe to test whether a promised emancipation could lead to possible recognition.
The proposal was strictly rejected by both Britain and France.

The American Civil War would be the first war to witness the use of aeronautics in support of battle.
In June of 1861 Professor Thaddeus S. C. Lowe left his work in the private sector as a scientist/balloonist and offered his services as an aeronaut to President Lincoln who took some interest in the idea of having an air war mechanism.
Lowe's demonstration of flying a balloon over Washington D. C. and transmitting a message via telegraph to the ground was enough to have hinm introduced to the commanders of the Topographical Engineers.

Lowe's first action was seen at the Battle of Bull Run in July of 1861 with General Irvin McDowell and the Grand Army of the Potomac.
He subsequently worked with Gen. George McClellan at Yorktown.
By October he had orders in hand to build four balloons with portable hydrogen gas generators for use in aerial reconnaissance.
Lowe, working with several other prominent American balloonists, formed the U. S. Balloon Corps yet never received commissions, rather they worked as civilian contractors, This was of great concern should the aeronauts be shot down over enemy lines.
Civilian spying is summarily punishible by death.

As the Confederates retreated toward Richmond (Va.) the War turned into what was referred to as the Penisular Campaign.
Due to the heavy forests on the peninsula, the balloons were unable to follow on land.
Lowe was introduced to the George Washington Parke Custis

Lowe was introduced to the George Washington Parke Custis, a coal barge converted to a flat top which would serve as the first aircraft carrier in history.
The balloons were loaded aboard with their gas generators and taken down the Potomac where reconnaissance of the peninsula could continue.
The GWP Custis was taken up the Pawmunkey River where Lowe was reunited with McClellan's army.

Lowe's most dramatic action came in the Battle of Fair Oaks where he was able to view the advancing of Lee's army onto the isolated detachment of General Heintzelman.
Working from two balloon camps, one at Mechanicsville and one at Gaine's Farm, Lowe galloped six miles twice daily to keep up with the reconnaissance reports.
McClellan was sure that the Rebels were feigning an attack.
Lowe could see differently.
But Heintzelman was left stranded on the other side of the Chickahominy River with the bridges having been taken out overnight by the swollen waters.
Lowe sent a dispatch of utmost urgency to have the bridge repaired immediately and reserves sent to Heintzelman's aid.
He then sent dispatch from Mechanicsville to Gaine's Farm calling for the immediate inflation of the large balloon Enterprise which would aid him in overlooking the imminent battle.

When Lowe arrived at Gaine's, the Intrepid will still far from being inflated.
In a quick work of inventive ingenuity, Lowe had the bottom of a camp kettle cut out and joined the valve ends of the Intrepid and the partially inflated Constitution hooked together thereby transferring the gas from the latter into the former.
Within 15 minutes he was in the air to oversee the battle which was in progress.
Fortunately, McClellan took Lowe's advice and had come to Heintzelman's aid, saving the day.

Lowe fell prey to malaria during Fair Oaks and was out of commission for more than a month.
On his return he found that the Balloon Corps had been dissembled and even left out of service for the Battle of Antietam.
Lowe was called back into service at Sharpsburg and responded to Gen. Burnside's army at Vicksburg.
The ensuing defeat of the Union Army in what was referred to as the mud march led to Gen. Joseph Hooker's replacement of Burnside.
By this time the Balloon Corps had been assigned to the Engineers Corps, and a newly promoted Captain Comstock cut Lowe's pay dramatically.

The Confederates tried their hand at ballooning as well, using dressmaking silk as a fabric for the aerostat envelopes.
The balloons were festooned in gay and floral color patterns.
But since inflation gas was at a premium in Richmond, there was not as much effective flight by the South.
Eventually they had lost all their balloons to the weather or capture, and with little or no material to be had, they were forced, much to their relief, to quit ballooning altogether by Summer 1863.

The origins of the American Civil War lay in the complex issues of politics, disagreements over the scope of States' rights versus federal power, slavery, expansionism, sectionalism, economics, modernization, and competing nationalism of the Antebellum Period.
As territorial expansion forced the nation to confront the question of whether new territories were to become "slave" or "free," the power of the slaveholders in national politics waned.
As the North and the South developed starkly divergent economies and societies, the divisive issues of sectionalism catapulted the United States into a Civil War (1861-1865).
For a chronology of events leading to the American Civil War, see Origins of the American Civil War timeline.

On the eve of the Civil War, the United States was a nation divided into four distinct regions: the Northeast, with a growing industrial and commercial economy and an increasing density of population; the Northwest, a rapidly expanding region of free farmers; the Upper South, with a settled plantation system and (in some areas) declining economic fortunes; and the Southwest, a booming frontier-like region with expanding cotton economy.
The economic and social structures across the nation's geographical regions–based on free labor in the Northeast and Northwest, and on slave labor in the Southeast and Southwest–resulted in the emergence of distinct visions of society by the mid-nineteenth century in the North and in the South.
Before the war, however, the Constitution provided the basis to define the terms in which debate over the future of government would continue, and had been able to regulate conflicts of interest and conflicting visions for the new, rapidly expanding nation.
Moral arguments against slavery had long existed, but, in the interest of maintaining unity, party loyalties had mostly moderated opposition to slavery, resulting in compromises, such as the Missouri Compromise of 1820 and the Compromise of 1850.

In the mid-19th century, the rise of mass democracy in the North, the breakdown of the old two-party system, the acquisition of new lands in the 1840s, and increasingly virulent and hostile sectional ideologies would make it increasingly difficult over time for the country's politicians to reach sectional compromises.
In the 1850s, with the rise of the Republican Party, the nation's first major political party with only sectional appeal, along with its skilled politicians and activists, the industrializing North became committed to the economic ethos of free-labor industrial capitalism.
The panic of 1857 further exasperated sectional tensions and helped Republicans sweep elections in 1860.
In 1860, the election of Abraham Lincoln, who met staunch opposition from Southern slave-owning interests, triggered Southern secession from the union.
The new president then led the U.S. through a war to save the integrity of the Union.

In 1854 the old political system broke down after passage of the Kansas-Nebraska Act.
The Whig Party disappeared, and the new Republican Party arose in its place.
It was the nation's first major political party with only sectional appeal; though it had much of the old Whig economic platform, its popularity rested on its commitment to stop the expansion of slavery into new territories.
Open warfare in the Kansas Territory, the panic of 1857, and John Brown's raid on Harper's Ferry further heightened sectional tensions and helped Republicans sweep elections in 1860.
In 1860, the election of Abraham Lincoln, who met staunch opposition from Southern slave-owning interests, triggered Southern secession from the union.
The new president decided to resort to arms, if necessary, to preserve the nation's territorial integrity.

A small but militant abolitionist movement existed in the North--a matter of a few thousand advocates.
Their insistence that slavery was a sin and slave owners were deeply guilty angered the South.
Historians have looked at many slave owners and decided that they felt neither guilt nor shame, but were angry at what they considered unchristian hate speech from abolitionists.
By the 1830s there was a widespread ideological defense of the "peculiar institution" everywhere in the South.

As territorial expansion forced the nation to confront the question of whether new territories were to become "slave" or "free," and as multiplying free states became a majority in the Union, the Slave Power in national politics waned.
The North and South did have different economies but they were complementary and not in competition.
The South made money by exporting cotton (and other unique crops like tobacco).
They North made money by exporting food and manufactured items.
Many northern business interests were closely tied to the Southern economy and pleaded for union and compromise.
Some Southerners thought they paid too much in tariffs--but they themselves had written and voted for the tariff laws in effect.

Both North and South believed strongly to republican values of democracy and civic virtue.
But their conceptualizations were diverging.
Each side though the other was aggressive, and was violating both the Constitution and the core values of American republicanism.
Nationalism was the dominant force in Europe in the 19th century and likewise in America.
The South was much more explicit in defining nationalism as a regional characteristic.
The North paid less attention to nationalism before 1860, but then focused its mind on it and stressed the whole country, North and South, was the unit of nationalism.

At a deeper level industrialization in the Northeast and farming in the Midwest depended on free labor, which could not exist alongside slave labor, as Lincoln kept emphasizing.
The nation had to be all free or all slave, said Lincoln.
(Historians Charles and Mary Beard went so far as to argue in 1928 that this sectional conflict was a "Second American Revolution"—a revolutionary watershed in the rise of modern industrial society in the United States.)
The States' rights debate cut across the issues.
Southern politicians argued that the federal government had no power to prevent slaves from being carried into new territories, but they also demanded federal jurisdiction over slaves who escaped into the North; Northern politicians took reversed, though equally contradictory, stances on these issues.