The Factory, located at 221 East 47th Street in Manhattan, was Warhol's studio from 1963 to 1967.
It moved to 33 Union Square West at the end of 1967 when the East 47th building was torn down.
The Factory was the hip hangout for artsy types, amphetamine users, and the Warhol superstars.
This is where Warhol would make his silkscreens.
The interior was covered with tin foil and silver paint, and silver "clouds" on the ceiling were affected by using large, helium-filled, pillow-shaped balloons.
The Factory became a meeting place of artists and would-be artists such as Mick Jagger, Lou Reed, David Bowie, and Truman Capote.
Warhol became the manager of Reed's influential New York rock band The Velvet Underground in 1965.
Several of Reed's songs are related to the people who gathered at The Factory, notably his best-known solo song Walk on the Wild Side, which makes reference to several of the superstars.
On June 3, 1968, Valerie Solanas, a Factory regular, entered Warhol's studio and fired three shots at Warhol, nearly killing him.
Although the first two rounds missed, the third passed through Warhol's left lung, spleen, stomach, liver, esophagus, and right lung.
Solanas then turned the gun on a companion of Warhol, Mario Amaya, injuring his thigh.
Although Warhol survived these injuries, he never fully recovered.
Solanas later explained that "he had too much control over my life."
The story of Valerie Solanas was made into the 1996 movie I Shot Andy Warhol starring Lili Taylor and directed by Mary Harron.
Warhol's friend Lou Reed, for one, never forgave Solanas for the attack.
In 1990 he recorded the album Songs for Drella with fellow Velvet Underground alumnus John Cale, which contained the song "I Believe".
In it, Reed sang "I believe/I would've pulled the switch on her myself."
In other songs on the album, Reed expresses his regrets about not having paid a lot of attention to Warhol in the time before his death.
Mr. Warhol himself ultimately forgave Valerie for shooting him and later satirized the whole event in a subsequent movie of his, calling a group similar to Solanas' S.C.U.M.
(Society for Cutting Up Men), P.I.G.
- Politically Involved Girlies.
In the 1970s and 1980s he mainly made prints of famous people such as Marilyn Monroe and Elvis Presley.
Iconic figures and famous people are a general theme in Warhol's work.
Besides his influence as a painter, Warhol was known as a highly proficient filmmaker.
Between 1963 and 1968, he made more than sixty films.
His most famous one, Sleep (1963), shows a man (John Giorno, who had a relationship with Warhol) sleeping for eight hours.
In the 35 minute film Blow Job (1963), he shows the face of *David Perlman receiving fellatio.
Warhol's character has also been represented in several motion pictures.
He has been portrayed by Crispin Glover, David Bowie, and Jared Harris, in The Doors, Basquiat, and I Shot Andy Warhol, respectively.
He also appeared as a bartender in The Cars' music video "Hello Again.
Warhol created the fashion magazine Interview that is still published today.
The loopy title script on the cover is thought to be either his own handwriting or his mother's Julia Warhola, who would often do text work for his early commercial pieces.
Warhol "wrote" several books.
Warhol used to socialize at Serendipity and Studio 54, nightclubs in New York City.
One of Warhol's favorite pop bands was Blondie; at one of the shows on their final tour in 1982 he also "fell in love" with both the music and the pretty looks of their opening act, Duran Duran.
He maintained a friendship with the band (and especially keyboardist Nick Rhodes) for many years.
The Andy Warhol Museum is located in the North Shore district of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
It is the largest American art museum dedicated to a single artist, holding more than 4 000 works by the artist himself.
Among others, Andy's brother, John Warhola, and the Warhol Foundation in New York, established in 1991 the Warhol Family Museum of Modern Art in the remote town of Medzilaborce, Slovakia.
Andy’s mother, Julia Warhola, was born 15 kilometres away in the village Mikova.

The Museum houses several originals donated mainly by the Andy Warhol Foundation in New York and also personal items donated by Warhol’s relatives.
Warhol was generally regarded as quiet and a meticulous observer or even a voyeur.
More than one person jokingly referred to him as "death warmed over."
He had a keen eye for art in general and furthered the Duchamp-esque notion that if you simply point at something and call it "art," it is.
He was openly gay, rare for celebrities of his stature at the time, and paid tribute to many male friends and workers in his private art and collections.
A meticulous collector, he organised almost every piece of paper, fan mail ---after taking off the stamps -- and magazine related to his fame along with personal notes, gay pornography and found artifacts into hundreds of numbered boxes and set them aside, never to open them again.
Warhol refered to these boxes as his "time capsule".
Many exist today and are available for research at his Pittsburgh museum.
Warhol would regularly volunteer at the homeless shelters in New York, particularly during the busier times of the year.
He described himself as a religious person, not fully accepted by religion because of his homosexuality.
Many of his works contain almost hidden religious themes or subjects.
Warhol died in New York City following routine gall bladder surgery at the age of 58.
Warhol was afraid of hospitals and doctors, so he delayed having his recurring gall bladder problems checked.
He is interred at St. John the Baptist Catholic Cemetery south of Pittsburgh.
Fellow artist Yoko Ono was among the speakers at his funeral.

After his death it took Sotheby's several days to auction his estate, for a total gross amount of over 20 million dollars.
Outside of the art world, Andy Warhol is best known for saying that "In the future, everyone will be world famous for 15 minutes."
Over the course of his lifetime the phrase became popular enough to enter the public space.
He later told reporters, humourously, "My new line is, 'In fifteen minutes everybody will be famous.'
".

In many of his efforts Warhol has taken the position of a producer or director, rather than a creator.
From an artist he gradually became the person that determined the direction and was the public face of a company, having a staff of sorts to do the actual labor involved in his products.
He would coin an idea and oversee its execution, his Factory evolved from an atelier into an office.
As this position proved to work out, he found himself able to expand his activities into other fields.
He founded the gossip magazine Interview, creating a stage for celebrities he "endorsed" and creating jobs for his friends.
He adopted the young painter Jean-Michel Basquiat, and the band The Velvet Underground and presented them to the public as his latest interest, cooperating with them, shaping their public personas.
He would produce things and people, and they were part of his artistic product.
He endorsed products, appeared in commercials, made business deals and even "sold" the film-making branch of his company when he decided to spend less time filming himself.

In this respect Warhol talked about "Art Business" and "Business Art", and how he thought business was the best type of art.
This was a radical new stance, as artists had always presented themselves as flamboyant, individual, visionairy outsiders - commenting on the normal part of society, but never really being a part of it.
And receiving appreciation for that position on basis of their idealism, rare talents and personalities.
Warhol and other pop-artists helped redefine the artist's position as professional, commercial, popular; a logical and valuable part of society.
He did this using methods, imagery and talents that were (or at least seemed to be) available to everyone.
Perhaps that has been the most meaningful result of (his) Pop Art; a philosophical and practical incorporation of art into society.

"The Exploding Plastic Inevitable, generated during the 1960’s, has often been cited as the pioneering multimedia experience.
Audiences were bombarded with floor to ceiling projections of Warhol films such as Vinyl.
At center stage, the Velvet underground were transported with Warhol-directed lighting effects.
Images filled the show, that were disturbing and abrasive as Lou Reed’s songs.
Collaboration between artists and musicians had never before, or since, proved so influential despite its short life span”.
Kate Butlers

To create the “EPI”, Warhol collaborated with some of the most creative people in  their fields.
In music, he collaborated with the Velvet Underground, which was  composed of some of the most advanced rock musicians of the time, including Lou  Reed, John Cale, Sterling Morrison, Mo Tucker, and the singer/actress Nico.
Once  adjusted to the initial sonic blast of the Velvet Underground, the listener at the Dom could hear the undertones of Rhythm and Blues, improvisations of free jazz as well as the musical avant-garde and the mystical drone of LaMonte Young.

The Exploding Plastic Inevitable attracted many people and a great deal of publicity and media.
The filmmaker Barbara Rubin and poet Allen Ginsberg were among the personalities participating, as was the well-known news anchorman Walter Cronkite, who came by to see what was happening, as did Jackie Kennedy and much of New York’s society.
It became a major culture happening as news crews reported on the scene.

Warhol said of this time:  “We all knew something revolutionary was happening.
We just felt it.
Things could not look this strange and new  without some barrier being broken.”

In May of the same year, the E.P.I.
took to the road, touring the United States and Canada.
The tour returned to Chicago in the mid-west in June 1966 and it was here that the filmmaker Ronald Nameth made extensive film recordings of the Exploding Plastic Inevitable every night during a one week period.
It is this film material which has been utilized to create comprehensive video and print editions of the Exploding Plastic Inevitable:

In response to this, Warhol writes, "There was nothing I could say to that.
It was all too true.
So I decided I just wasn't going to care, because those were all the things that I didn't want to change anyway, that I didn't think I should want to change...Other people could change their attitudes but not me."

In the 1960s, Warhol began to make paintings of famous American products such as Campbell's soup cans and Coca-Cola.
He switched to silkscreen prints, seeking not only to make art of mass-produced items but to mass produce the art itself.
He said he wanted to be like a machine.
His most influential and important collaborator during this period was Gerard Malanga, who introduced Warhol to many of the superstars who would soon appear in his films, in addition to assisting the artist with the silkscreening of many of his major paintings, prints, films, sculptures and other items at "The Factory," his tinfoil-and-silver-paint lined studio located in New York.
He also groomed a retinue of bohemian eccentrics upon whom he bestowed the ironic designation "superstars".

A lot of Warhol's works revolve around the concepts of Americana and American popular culture.
He painted money, food, women's shoes, celebrities, newspaper clippings and everyday objects.
To him, these subjects represented American cultural values.
For instance, Coca-Cola represented democratic equality:

He used popular imagery and methods to visualize the American cultural identity of the 20th century.
This popular redefinition of American culture is a theme and result of Warhol's art.
On June 3, 1968, Valerie Solanas shot Warhol in the chest.
Solanas had previously founded a "group" (she was its only member) called the "Society for Cutting Up Men" (S.C.U.M.)
and authored the S.C.U.M.
Manifesto, a work of radical feminist literature that has since found something of a following both from those who take it seriously and those who find it inadvertently humorous.
Arrested the day after the assault (coincidentally, the day that Robert F. Kennedy was shot), she said, "He had too much control over my life."
Warhol was seriously wounded and suffered physical effects for the rest of his life.
He had, for instance, to wear a corset to support himself.
The shooting had a profound effect on Warhol's life and art, and The Factory scene became much more tightly controlled.
Compared to the success and scandal of Warhol's work in the 1960s, the 1970s would prove a much quieter decade.
This period, however, saw Warhol becoming more entrepreneurial.
According to Bob Colacello, Warhol devoted much of his time rounding up new, rich patrons for portrait commissions — including Mick Jagger, Liza Minnelli, John Lennon, Diana Ross, Brigitte Bardot and Michael Jackson.
He also founded, with Gerard Malanga, Interview magazine and published The Philosophy of Andy Warhol (1975).
In this book he presents his ideas on the nature of art: "Making money is art, and working is art and good business is the best art."

Warhol used to socialize at Serendipity 3 and, later in the 70s, Studio 54, nightspots in New York City.
He was generally regarded as quiet, shy, and as a meticulous observer.
Art critic Robert Hughes called him "the white mole of Union Square".
Warhol had a re-emergence of critical and financial success in the 1980s, partially due to his affiliation and friendships with a number of prolific younger artists, who were dominating the "bull market" of '80s New York art: Jean-Michel Basquiat, Julian Schnabel, David Salle and the so-called Neo-Expressionists, as well as Francesco Clemente, Enzo Cucchi and members of the Transavantguardia movement, which had become influential.
In 1985, Andy Warhol was selected as one of the Absolut Vodka artists, and several of his paintings incorporating the Absolut Vodka bottle in it were utilized in advertisements, bringing his art to the attention of a broader audience.
At the relatively young age of 58, Warhol died in New York City at 6:32 a.m. on February 22, 1987.
According to news reports, he had been making good recovery from a routine gallbladder surgery at New York Hospital before dying in his sleep from a sudden heart attack.
The hospital staff had failed to monitor his condition and overloaded him with fluids after his operation, prompting Warhol's lawyers to sue the hospital for negligence.

Warhol had so many possessions it took Sotheby's nine days to auction his estate after his death for a total gross amount of over US $20 million.
His total estate was worth considerably more, in no small part due to shrewd investments over the years.
Warhol regularly volunteered at homeless shelters in New York, particularly during the busier times of the year, and described himself as a religious person.
Many of his later works contain almost hidden religious themes or subjects, and a body of religious-themed works was found posthumously in his estate.
Warhol also regularly attended Mass during his life, and the pastor of his Byzantine Rite Catholic church, Saint Vincent's, reports that he visited the church almost daily.

Warhol's brother has described the artist as "really religious, but he didn't want people to know about that because was private."
Despite the private nature of his faith, in Warhol's eulogy John Richardson depicted it as devout: "To my certain knowledge, he was responsible for at least one conversion.
He took considerable pride in financing his nephew's studies for the priesthood."

When he decided to pursue a career as an artist, Warhol already had established a reputation as a commercial illustrator mostly doing illustrations of shoes.
In school he had created paintings, but his work afterward had mainly consisted of "blotted ink" illustrations for warehouses and magazines.
He felt he was not being taken seriously as an illustrator and wanted to become a true artist.

When he started painting, he wanted to find a target for himself.
At the time Pop Art, as it was later named, was already an experimental form.
Warhol turned to this new style where popular subjects could be part of the artist's palette.
His early paintings show images taken from cartoons and advertisements, hand-painted with added paint drips.
He added these drips to give his paintings a seriousness by emulating the style of the abstract expressionists that were popular at the time.
He wanted to be taken seriously or to sell his paintings, which may have had the same meaning to Warhol.

To him, part of defining a niche was defining his subject matter.
Cartoons were already being used by the artist Roy Lichtenstein, typography by Jasper Johns, and so on; Warhol wanted a distinguishing subject.
His friends suggested he should paint the things he loved the most.
In his signature way of taking things literally, for his first major exhibition he painted his famous cans of Campbell's Soup, which he had for lunch most of his life.
Warhol loved money, so he later painted money.
He loved celebrities, so he painted them as well.

From these beginnings he developed his later style and subjects.
Instead of working on a signature subject matter, as he started out to do, he worked more and more on a signature style, slowly eliminating the hand-made from the artistic process.
Warhol frequently employed silk-screening; his later drawings were traced from slide projections.
In other words, Warhol went from being a painter to being a designer of paintings.
At the height of his fame as a painter, Warhol had several assistants who produced his silk-screen multiples, in different versions and variations following his directions.

Warhol produced both 'comic' (e.g., soup cans) and 'serious' (e.g., electric chairs) works.
The unifying element in his work is his deadpan Keatonesque style - artistically and personally affectless.
Before this blankness, the lack of signifiers of sincerity, the viewer is forced to attempt to read behind the surface to what the 'real Andy' thinks.
Is Andy horrifed by death or does he think it is funny?
Are soup cans in art galleries about the cheapness of mass culture, a cynical joke about the American collector's artistic nationalism (and aim for their wallet), or his genuine love for his mother (who maternally fed him canned soup)?
His withdrawal ends up being the opposite of self-effacement.

As time went on, Warhol's work became more conceptual.
His series of do-it-yourself paintings and Rorschach blots are intended as pop comments on art and what art could be.
His cow wallpaper (literally, wallpaper with a cow motif) and his oxidation paintings (canvases prepared with copper paint that show oxidated urine stains) are also noteworthy in this context.
Equally noteworthy is the way these works -- and their means of production -- mirrored the mores and atmosphere at Andy's New York "Factory."
Biographer Bob Colacello provides some details on Andy's "piss paintings":

It has been suggested that Warhol would just take images of things that were hip in his time and cover them in "Warhol gravy", but for Warhol there always was a personal relation between him and his subjects.
For instance the Campbell's Soup did not only function as an illustration of commercial industry and advertisement, it was an intrinsic part of Warhol's life and memories.
As a child his mother had given him this soup when he was sick, and Warhol loved it very much as an adult.
For him (and for many other Americans) the soup represented a feeling of being "home" or what is often called "comfort food".

Another criterion that was important in the way Warhol chose his subjects was they had to represent a more philosophical notion and have a metaphorical quality.
When Warhol painted money, he painted it because he wanted to own it - canvases filled with money.
Partly his work was meant to provide him with this money (and success, fame and maybe even love).
At the same time, these paintings spoke of art as a commercial commodity: the paintings of dollar bills represented monetary value as well as investments.
In this way, instead of merely depicting dollar bills, the paintings touched on notions like artistic value or as a comment on art practice.

Similarly, when Warhol painted photographs of disasters in bright colors ("Red Car Crash", "Purple Jumping Man", "Orange Disaster") they pointed at the horror of the event in the picture and its media value but also at the way in which such images are trivialized by the media.
By turning these "random" clippings into paintings, Warhol transformed them into monuments for personal tragedies.
As such, they represent a personal experience as well as a social comment and an illustration of a time when the media grew in pertinence and relevance.
Warhol worked across a wide range of media — painting, photography, drawing, and sculpture.
In addition, he was a highly prolific filmmaker.
Between 1963 and 1968, he made more than sixty films.
One of his most famous films, Sleep (1963), shows a man (John Giorno, with whom Warhol had a relationship) sleeping for six hours.
The 41-minute film Blow Job (1963) is one continuous shot of the face of Tom Baker, receiving oral sex from Willard Maas.
Another, Empire (1964), consists of eight hours of footage of the Empire State Building in New York City at dusk.

Batman Dracula is a 1964 film that was produced and directed by Warhol, without the permission of DC Comics.
It was screened only at his art exibits.
A fan of the Batman serials, Warhol's movie was a "homage" to the series, and is considered the first appearance of a blatantly campy Batman.
No prints of the film are known to exist.

Warhol's 1965 film Vinyl is an adaptation of Anthony Burgess' popular dystopian novel A Clockwork Orange.
Others record improvised encounters between Factory regulars such as Brigid Berlin, Viva, Edie Sedgwick, Candy Darling, Holly Woodlawn, Ondine, Nico, and Jackie Curtis.
Legendary underground artist Jack Smith appears in the film Camp.

His most popular and critically successful film was Chelsea Girls (1966).
The film was highly innovative in that it consisted of two 16 mm films being projected simultaneously, with two different stories being shown in tandem.
From the projection booth, the sound would be raised for one film to elucidate that "story" while it was lowered for the other.
Then it would be the other film's turn to bask in the glory of sound.
The multiplication of images evoked Warhol's seminal silk-screen works of the early 1960s.
The influence of the film's split-screen, multi-narrative style could be felt in such modern work as Mike Figgis' Timecode and, however indirectly, the early seasons of 24 (TV series).

Other important films include Bike Boy, My Hustler (1965) and Lonesome Cowboys (1968), a raunchy pseudo-Western.
These titles and other titles document gay underground and camp culture, and continue to feature prominently in scholarship about sexuality and art (see, for example, Mathew Tinkom's Working Like a Homosexual (Duke University Press, 2002) or Juan Suarez's Bike Boys, Drag Queens, and Superstars (Indiana University Press, 1996).
Blue Movie, a film in which Warhol superstar Viva makes love and fools around in bed with a man for 33 minutes of the film's playing-time, was Warhol's last film as director.
The film was at the time scandalous for its frank approach to a sexual encounter.
For many years Viva refused to allow it to be screened.
It was publicly screened in New York in 2005 for the first time in over thirty years.

After his June 3, 1968 shooting, a reclusive Warhol relinquished his personal involvement in filmmaking.
His acolyte and assistant director, Paul Morrissey, took over the film-making chores for the Factory collective, steering Warhol-branded cinema towards more mainstream, narrative-based, B-movie exploitation fare with Flesh, Trash, and Heat.
All of these films, including the later Andy Warhol's Dracula and Andy Warhol's Frankenstein, were far more mainstream than anything Warhol as a director had attempted.
These latter "Warhol" films starred Joe Dallesandro, who was more of a Morrissey star than a true Warhol superstar.

Warhol adopted the band the Velvet Underground as one of his projects in the 1960s, "producing" their first album The Velvet Underground and Nico as well as providing the album art.
His actual participation in the album's production amounted to simply paying for the studio time.
After the band's first album, Warhol and band leader Lou Reed started to disagree more about the direction the band should take, and the contact between them faded.

Warhol was also friendly with many musicians, including Bob Dylan and John Lennon - he designed the cover to Lennon's 1986 posthumously released Menlove Avenue.
Warhol also appeared as a bartender in The Cars' music video for their single "Hello Again," and Curiosity Killed The Cat's video for their "Misfit" single (both videos, and others, were produced by Warhol's video production company).
He had a crush on Duran Duran's Nick Rhodes, with whom he met fairly often.

The first of several bound self-published books by Warhol was 25 Cats Name Sam and One Blue Pussy, printed in 1954 by Seymour Berlin on Art ches brand watermarked paper using his blotted line technique for the lithographs.
The original edition was limited to 190 numbered, hand colored copies, using Dr. Martin's ink washes.
Most of these were given by Warhol as gifts to clients and friends.
Copy #4, inscribed "Jerry" on the front cover, was given to Geraldine Stutz, who at the time was with I. Miller Shoes.
Later the president of Henri Bendel and then while head of Panache Press an imprint of Random House she used this copy for a facsimile printing in 1987.

By the beginning of the 1960s, Warhol was a very successful commercial illustrator.
His detailed and elegant drawings for I. Miller shoes were particularly popular.
These illustrations consisted mainly of "blotted ink" drawings (monoprints)—a technique which he applied in much of his early art.
Although many artists of this period worked in commercial art, most did so discreetly.
Warhol was so successful, however, that his profile as an illustrator seemed to undermine his efforts to be taken seriously as an artist.

In the early 1960s Warhol tried to exhibit some of his drawings using these techniques in a gallery, only to be turned down.
He began to rethink the relationship between his commercial work and the rest of his art.
Instead of treating these things as opposites, he merged them, and began to take commercial and popular culture more explicitly as his topic.

Pop Art was an experimental form that several artists were independently adopting; some of these pioneers, such as Roy Lichtenstein, would later become synonymous with the movement.
Warhol, who would become famous as the "Pope of Pop", turned to this new style, where popular subjects could be part of the artist's palette.
His early paintings show images taken from cartoons and advertisements, hand-painted with paint drips.
Those drips emulated the style of successful abstract expressionists (such as Robert Rauschenberg).
Eventually, Warhol pared his image vocabulary down to the icon itself—to brand names, celebrities, dollar signs—and removed all traces of the artist's "hand" in the production of his paintings.

To him, part of defining a niche was defining his subject matter.
Cartoons were already being used by Lichtenstein, typography by Jasper Johns, and so on; Warhol wanted a distinguishing subject.
His friends suggested he should paint the things he loved the most.
In his signature way of taking things literally, for his first major exhibition he painted his famous cans of Campbell's Soup, which he'd had for lunch for most of his life.
Warhol loved money, so he later painted money.
He loved celebrities, so he painted them as well.

From these beginnings he developed his later style and subjects.
Instead of working on a signature subject matter, as he started out to do, he worked more and more on a signature style, slowly eliminating the hand-made from the artistic process.
Warhol frequently used silk-screening; his later drawings were traced from slide projections.
Warhol went from being a painter to being a designer of paintings.
At the height of his fame as a painter, Warhol had several assistants who produced his silk-screen multiples, following his directions to make different versions and variations.

Warhol produced both comic and serious works; his subject could be a soup can or an electric chair.
Warhol used the same techniques—silkscreens, reproduced serially, and often painted with bright colors—whether he painted celebrities, everyday objects, or images of suicide, car crashes, and disasters (as part of a 1962-1963 series called "Death and Disaster").
The "Death and Disaster" paintings (such as "Red Car Crash", "Purple Jumping Man", "Orange Disaster") transform personal tragedies into public spectacles, and signal the prominence of images of disaster in the media, showing how the mass reproduction of these images numbs the public.

The unifying element in Warhol's work is his deadpan Keatonesque style—artistically and personally affectless.
This was mirrored by Warhol's own demeanor, as he often played "dumb" to the media, and refused to explain his work.
The artist was famous for having said that all you need to know about him and his works is already there, "on the surface."
Before this blankness, the lack of signifiers of sincerity, the viewer is tempted to read beyond the surface to try and discover what the 'real Andy' thinks.
Is Andy horrified by death or does he think it is funny?
Are his soup can paintings a cynical joke about the cheapness of mass culture, or are they homages to the simple comforts of home?
His refusal to speak to how his work ought to be read made it all the more interesting—he left its interpretation entirely up to his audience.

One might say that Warhol's work as a Pop Artist was always somewhat conceptual.
His series of do it yourself paintings and Rorschach blots are intended as pop comments on art and what art could be.
His cow wallpaper (literally, wallpaper with a cow motif) and his oxidation paintings (canvases prepared with copper paint that was then oxidized with urine) are also noteworthy in this context.
Equally noteworthy is the way these works—and their means of production—mirrored the atmosphere at Andy's New York "Factory."
Biographer Bob Colacello provides some details on Andy's "piss paintings":

One could say that these "piss paintings" could be seen as a parody of Abstract Expressionism and Jackson Pollock (who was famous for pouring paint all over his canvases, often directly from the can).
One could also find in them a reflection of some subsets of the gay underworld of New York of that era, including fascination with and sexual focus on urine and excretory matter in general.
Demi-monde New York nightclubs of that period include "The Toilet," a spot featuring public urination acts (to include being doused by others, or drinking their urine) and others of a similar nature, such as "The Anvil."
Andy visited these spots, although he was not recorded as a subject of undinistic practices, but rather, as so often, as an observer.
In any case, he was wholly familiar with the undinistic, urologic, and other "watersports" practices of the day.