Despite the extraordinary acclaim that Kurosawa’s work has received both in Japan and abroad, his films, as well as Kurosawa as an individual, have also been subject to considerable criticism, much of it harsh.
The majority of these negative judgments can be considered to fall into one or more of the following categories:In the early-to-mid 1950s, while Kurosawa’s films were being widely viewed in Europe and North America, the final films of a Japanese film master of the older generation, Kenji Mizoguchi, also began to be shown internationally and receive film festival prizes.
This simultaneous exposure led to frequent critical comparisons between the two directors.
A number of critics belonging to the French New Wave, such as Jean-Luc Godard, championed Mizoguchi’s films at the expense of Kurosawa’s work:

Godard’s fellow New Wave critic-filmmaker, Jacques Rivette, writes: “"You can compare only what is comparable and that which aims high enough.
Mizoguchi, alone, imposes a feeling of a unique world and language, is answerable only to himself...
He seems to be the only Japanese director who is completely Japanese and yet is also the only one that achieves a true universality, that of an individual."

It should be noted that Kurosawa himself deeply admired the older master, particularly his indefatigable perfectionism.
In his eulogy at Mizoguchi's funeral, Kurosawa said, “Mizoguchi’s greatness was that he would do anything to heighten the reality of every scene.
He never made compromises… Of all Japanese directors, I have the greatest respect for him... With the death of Mizoguchi, Japanese film has lost its truest creator.”

During the Second World War, workers on all levels of the Japanese film industry were under immense pressure to create works that not only omitted the slightest criticism of the ruling military dictatorship, but which actively promoted kokusaku ("national policy"), that is, militarism and other aspects of fascist ideology.
It was in this highly politicized atmosphere that Kurosawa began his career as a director in 1943.
Therefore, some controversy exists about the extent to which his films of this period could be considered fascist propaganda.

The cultural historian Peter B.
High sees Kurosawa’s wartime cinema as part of the general propagandistic cultural trends of Japan at war and as reflecting many of these conventions.
About his second film, The Most Beautiful, which High refers to as a "dark and gloomy rendition of the standard formulas of the front genre", he writes: "The film announces its spiritist message in the very first scene.
Over a loudspeaker, the factory manager (Shimura Takashi) is giving his morning pep talk to the factory personnel: 'Only an indomitable spirit of deep responsibility can achieve outstanding production results.
There can be no improvement in production without an improvement in personal character!'
The montage cuts back and forth between Shimura and the workers lined up in military fashion.
One of the lines is made up of extremely young boys – a depressing sight."
High also claims that Kurosawa during this period demonstrated “a talent and enthusiasm for national policy scenarios,” writing the blatantly propagandistic Winged Victory (for director Satsuo Yamamoto) and submitting several other scripts that won prizes in “people’s cinema script” contests given by the wartime Information Bureau.

A number of critics have reacted negatively to the female characters in Kurosawa’s movies.
(Kurosawa himself once noted: "Of course, all my women my films are rather strange, I agree.")
Joan Mellen, in her examination of this subject, praises only the director’s characterization of Yukie (Setsuko Hara), the heroine of No Regrets for Our Youth, remarking that "her face expresses the very potential of the Japanese woman that has been so often, during all these long centuries, left wasted and latent."
Of the main female character in Rashomon, Masago, Mellen claims that "in none of the versions the film’s self-contradictory narrative is the woman (Machiko Kyo) granted self-respect, dignity or spiritual value," and argues that Masago represents one aspect of a "whore-madonna" dichotomy on the part of her creator.

Mellon also claims that, after Rashomon, Kurosawa stopped portraying women’s potential in his works "as if repelled by Masago, that half-demon of his own creation."
She maintains that many of Kurosawa’s later heroines fall into one of two categories: the destructive and the masochistic woman.
Speaking of The Idiot, she wrote, "the sensual woman is portrayed as the castrating bitch and the ‘good’ girl is devoid of any capacity for pleasure."
In the Gorky adaptation, The Lower Depths, one heroine is "manipulative and malicious," and the other is "weak and unable to survive on her own."
By the time of Red Beard (1965), "women in Kurosawa have become not only unreal and incapable of kindness, but totally bereft of autonomy, whether physical, intellectual, or emotional… Women at their best may only imitate the truths men discover."

Mitsuhiro Yoshimoto has noted that Kurosawa’s films often offer a paradoxical bond between good and evil male protagonists, in which the distinction between them becomes blurred.
Outside this "Möbius strip of male bonding," any woman "functions as a catalyst of sentimentalism by neutralizing" this duality.
"Without being able to produce any value by herself," Yoshimoto writes, "the woman in Kurosawa’s films is often the embodiment of passivity threatening the solipsism of the split male subject."

Akira Kurosawa was born on 23 March 1910 in Oi-cho in the Ōmori district of Tokyo.
His father Isamu, a member of a former samurai family from the Akita Prefecture, worked as the director of the Army's Physical Education Institute's lower secondary school, while his mother Shima came from a merchant's family living in Osaka.
Akira was the eighth and youngest child of the moderately wealthy family, with two of his siblings already grown up at the time of his birth and one deceased, leaving Kurosawa to grow up with three sisters and a brother.

In his autobiography, which several commentators have suggested reads much like a screenplay, Kurosawa recollects his father's early influence on him.
In addition to promoting physical exercise – Akira was captain of his school's kendo club – Isamu Kurosawa was open to western traditions and saw theatre and motion pictures educationally valuable, encouraging his children to watch them, with young Akira seeing his first films at the age of six.
Another formative influence mentioned by Kurosawa was his elementary school teacher Mr Tachikawa, whose progressive educational practices ignited in his young pupil first a love of drawing and then an interest in education in general.

Outside of the adult world, Kurosawa had two particularly close childhood friends whom he later saw as influencing his early development.
One was the elementary school class mate Keinosuke Uekusa, who like Kurosawa was a sensitive child and something of an outsider.
The friendship between the two lasted their lifetimes, with Uekusa becoming a successful playwright and novelist who also co-wrote two of Kurosawa's early films.

Another childhood influence was Heigo Kurosawa, Akira's older brother by four years.
Unlike Akira, Heigo was academically gifted, but soon after failing to secure a place in Tokyo's foremost high school, he begun to detach himself from the rest of the family, preferring to concentrate on his interest in foreign literature.
In the late 1920s, Heigo became a silent film narrator for Tokyo film theatres, and quickly made a name for himself.
Akira, who at this point was entertaining the notion of becoming a painter, moved in to live with him, and the two became inseparable.
Through Heigo, Akira gained an easy access to theatres, and devoured not only films but also theatre and circus performances, while exhibiting his paintings and working for the left-wing Proletarian Artists' League.

In 1935, the film studio Photo Chemical Laboratories (P.C.L., later Toho) advertised that it was looking for new assistant directors.
This was part of their ongoing strategy to lure in talent, which had already seen big name directors and actors like Kajiro Yamamoto, Mikio Naruse and Denjirō Ōkōchi join the studio from other companies.
Although he had had no previous interest in entering the film industry, Kurosawa answered the newspaper ad by submitting the required essay, which asked applicants to discuss the fundamental deficiencies of Japanese films and find ways to overcome them.
His half-mocking view was that if the deficiencies were fundamental, there was no way to correct them.
Kurosawa's essay earned him a call to follow-up exams, and although his overall performance was not on par with the competition, director Kajiro Yamamoto, who was among the examiners, took liking to Kurosawa, and insisted that the studio hire him.
As a result, Kurosawa joined P.C.L.
in February 1936, together with four other new assistant directors.

During his five years as an assistant director, Kurosawa worked under numerous directors, including Mikio Naruse, Eisuke Takizawa, Shigeo Yagura and Osamu Fushimizu.
Meanwhile, other assistant directors at P.L.C.
included such upcoming talents as Ishiro Honda and Senkichi Taniguchi, who Kurosawa befriended, and would later go on to work with on his own films.

However, by far the most important figure in Kurosawa's development as a director at the time was Kajiro Yamamoto.
A total of 17 of Kurosawa's 24 films as an assistant director were under him, many of which were so-called Enoken comedies starring the popular actor Kenichi Enomoto.
Yamamoto nurtured Kurosawa's talent, promoting him directly from third assistant director to chief assistant director merely a year after the young student had started working for him, and little by little, Kurosawa's responsibilities increased, as he found himself working in a wide variety of tasks ranging from stage construction and film development to location scouting, script polishing, rehearsals, cameras, lighting, direction and editing.
In the last of Kurosawa's films as an assistant director, Horse (Uma, 1941), Kurosawa took over most of the production, as Yamamoto was concurrently occupied with the shooting of another film.

One central piece of advice that Yamamoto gave Kurosawa was that a director would first and foremost need to know how to write screenplays.
Following his advice, Kurosawa set out to write at least one page each day, and soon realised that the potential earnings to be gained from scriptwriting were much higher than what he was being paid as an assistant director.
In his career, Kurosawa would later write, or more often co-write, all of his own films, in addition to providing scripts for other directors.

All biographical sources, as well as the filmmaker’s own comments, agree that Kurosawa was a completely “hands-on” director, passionately involved in every aspect of the filmmaking process.
As one interviewer summarized, “he (co-writes his scripts, oversees the design, rehearses the actors, sets up all the shots and then does the editing.”  Kurosawa emphasized time and again that the screenplay was the absolute foundation of a successful film and that a good film can never be made out of a bad script.
"For truly cinematic expression, the camera and the microphone must be able to cross both fire and water… The script must be something that has the power to do this."
During the postwar period, he began the practice of collaborating with a rotating group of five screenwriters: Eijirō Hisaita, Ryuzo Kikushima, Shinobu Hashimoto, Hideo Oguni, and Masato Ide.
Whichever members of this group happened to be working on a particular film would gather around a table, often at a hot-springs resort, where they would not be distracted by the outside world.
(Seven Samurai, for example, was written in this fashion.)
Often they all (except Oguni, who acted as “referee”) would work on the exact same pages of the script, and Kurosawa would choose the best-written version of each particular sequence.
This method was adopted "so that each contributor might function as a kind of foil, checking the dominance of any one person’s point-of-view."

In addition to the actual script, Kurosawa at this stage often produced extensive, fantastically detailed notes to elaborate his vision.
For example, for Seven Samurai, he created six notebooks in which he produced detailed biographies of the samurai, including what they wore and ate, how they walked, talked and behaved when greeted, even how each tied his shoes.
For the 101 peasant characters in the film, he created a registry consisting of 23 families and instructed the performers playing these roles to live and work as these “families” for the duration of shooting.

Japan had been at war since its invasion of China in 1937, had formally joined the Axis Powers in 1940, and had ignited a more global war in December 1941 by attacking British and American holdings, including Pearl Harbor.
Many Japanese film makers were drafted to serve overseas, but a sympathetic army physician who had been a former student of Kurosawa's father had classified Kurosawa physically unfit for service back in 1930, and he was never called by the military.
Yet, the war effort continued to affect lives in mainland Japan, including Kurosawa's.
Film production suffered, and was scrutinised increasingly closely by the government's wartime censorship boards.
Kurosawa's first attempt at launching his career came to a halt in pre-production when censors rejected his script for A German at Daruma Temple (Daruma-dera no doitsujin), while his second attempt with Three Hundred Miles Through Enemy Lines (Tenkichu odan sanbyaku ri) was turned down by his film studio Toho, who could not afford to produce it due to wartime cuts.

Then towards the end of 1942, novelist Tsuneo Tomita published his Musashi Miyamoto inspired judo novel Sanshiro Sugata.
Having been intrigued by earlier advertisements, Kurosawa bought the work on its publication day, devoured it in one sitting, and immediately asked Toho to secure the film rights.
Kurosawa's instincts were correct, as within a few days three other major Japanese studios had also offered to purchase the rights.
Toho, however, prevailed, and Kurosawa was finally in pre-production of what was to become his maiden work.

Shooting of Sanshiro Sugata begun on location in Yokohama on December 13, 1942.
In his autobiography, Kurosawa recalls how peculiar his voice sounded when he first called "action" – something that he had done countless times as an assistant director.
From there on, however, the production proceeded without major hiccups.
But getting the completed film past the censors was a different matter.
Regardless of its propagandist qualities, the censorship board considered the work too "British-American", and it was only through the intervention of director Yasujiro Ozu that Sanshiro Sugata was finally accepted for release on March 25, 1943.
The filmed turned out to be both a critical and commercial success.
Nevertheless, the censorship office would later decide to cut out some 18 minutes of footage, much of which is now considered lost.

Following the success of Sanshiro Sugata, the Japanese Navy asked Kurosawa to create a propaganda film about Zero fighters, but the project failed to take off as the military lacked the necessary resources.
Instead, Kurosawa turned to wartime female factory workers in The Most Beautiful, a propaganda film which he shot in a semi-documentary style between January and March 1944.
In order to coax out realistic acting performances, Kurosawa's approach was to have the actors and crew live in a real factory during the shoot, eat the factory food and call each other by their character names.
The director would later use similar methods throughout his career.

The Most Beautiful was released on April 13, 1944.
During the production, the actress playing the president of the women workers, Yōko Yaguchi, had as the representative of the actresses been in constant conflict with Kurosawa, and through these arguments the two had become to know each other fairly well.
They continued their relationship after the production, eventually leading into the two getting married on May 21, 1945, with Yōko two months pregnant.

Kurosawa, whose director's income was hardly sufficient to support himself, let alone a family, continued to write screenplays.
Wrestling-Ring Festival (Dohyosai) was directed by Santaro Marune and released in March 1944, while the Kiyoshi Saeki directed Bravo!
Tenbare Ishin (Tenbare Ishin tasuke) came to theatres in January 1945.
Kurosawa himself was forced to direct a film that he had little interest in making, and Sanshiro Sugata Part II, a half-hearted sequel to his maiden work, premiered on May 3, 1945.
The film, at times blatantly propagandist, is generally considered one of his weakest.

After Sanshiro Sugata Part II, Kurosawa planned to film his script The Lifted Spear (Dokkoi kono yari), based on the events that he would later revisit in Kagemusha, but the project was cancelled in pre-production due to a lack of funds.
Kurosawa then moved on quickly to write a film that would be both censor friendly and less expensive to produce, with the resulting The Men Who Tread on the Tiger's Tail based on the Kabuki play Kanjinchō and completed in September 1945.
Unfortunately for Kurosawa, the war had by now ended, and the values promoted in his new work were seen as too feudalistic by the new American occupation censors.
The work was consequently banned, and would only be released in 1952.

On December 20, 1945, Yōko gave birth to a son whom the couple named Hisao.
After the failed release of The Men Who Tread on the Tiger's Tail, Kurosawa had spent much of the rest of the year at home with Yōko, working on a play titled Talking (Shaberu), which dealt with a situation where people suddenly find themselves able to speak their minds freely, something that reflected the changes taking place in Japan.
In early 1946, upon request by Toho who were suffering from labour strikes, Kurosawa took part in filming the pro-unionist Those Who Make Tomorrow together with directors Kajiro Yamamoto and Hideo Sekigawa.
Kurosawa had very little interest in making the film which reportedly took only a week to shoot, and would never consider it part of his oeuvre.

This was followed by Kurosawa's first proper post-war film No Regrets for Our Youth, released on October 29 1946, based on the 1933 Takigawa incident, and critical of Japan's pre-war regime.
Kurosawa's aim with the film and those that succeeded it was to show that the only way for Japan to begin anew was by establishing a new respect towards the individual and the self.
The original script had to be rewritten and due to its controversial nature the completed work divided critics, but it nevertheless managed to win the approval of the audiences, who turned the film's title into something of a post-war catchphrase.
No Regrets for Our Youth was also the first film where Kurosawa shared the writing credit, beginning a habit of collaborative writing that he would stick to for the next forty years.

In early 1947, Kurosawa worked on two love stories.
He contributed to the script of the ensemble film Four Love Stories (Yotsu no koi no monogatari), directed by Shirō Toyoda, Mikio Naruse, Kenta Yamazaki and Teinosuke Kinugasa.
Three months after the film's release, Kurosawa's own One Wonderful Sunday premiered on July 1, 1947 to somewhat mixed reviews.
The film is a relatively uncomplicated and sentimental post-war love story which bears the influence of Frank Capra, D. W. Griffith and F. W. Murnau.
One Wonderful Sunday also reunited Kurosawa with his childhood friend and novelist Keinosuke Uekusa, with whom Kurosawa shared the writer's credit.
A third film released in 1947 with Kurosawa's involvement was the action adventure Snow Trail.
It was directed by Senkichi Taniguchi from Kurosawa's screenplay and debuted a young actor by the name of Toshirō Mifune, whom Kurosawa had helped to pick for the studio from a group of prospective new talents.

Kurosawa's next film, Drunken Angel, is often considered the director's first major work.
Although the script, like all of Kurosawa's immediate post-war works, had to go through forced rewrites due to occupation censorship, Kurosawa felt that Drunken Angel was the first film where he was able to express himself freely.
It was also his first film with Toshirō Mifune, who would proceed to play a leading or major character in all but one of the director's next sixteen films.
While Mifune was not cast as the main character in Drunken Angel, his explosive performance as a young gangster suffering from tuberculosis so dominates the screen that it shifts the focus from the titular alcoholic doctor treating him, played by another Kurosawa regular of 21 films Takashi Shimura, who had already appeared in all of Kurosawa's early films apart from Sanshiro Sugata Part II.

Preproduction on Drunken Angel started in November 1947, and the shooting wrapped on March 10, 1948, with a premiere in Tokyo on April 27 to rave reviews.
During the final weeks of shooting, the health of Kurosawa's father had declined sharply but the son, pressured to wrap up the production, could not travel to be at his side.
When the news reached Kurosawa about his father's death at the age of 83, he went out to wander aimlessly in the streets of Shinjuku.
While there, his sorrowful mood was magnified by hearing the song 'The Cuckoo Waltz'.
Inspired by this, the piece also made its way also into Drunken Angel, where the cheerful song was used in a similar manner to emphasise a character's emotional suffering.
This is the first example of a type of musical counterpoint that Kurosawa would experiment on with his new composer Fumio Hayasaka, with whom Kurosawa would develop an extremely close working relationship and who would, until his untimely death in 1955, score all but one of the director's next eight films.

For much of the rest of 1948, film production at Toho was halted due to a union strike, and the only film in production with Kurosawa's involvement was Keisuke Kinoshita's The Portrait (Shozo), released by Shochiku in August and filmed from Kurosawa's screenplay.
Unable to work on a new film and faced with the need to support his wife and young son, Kurosawa proceeded to direct and tour with two theatre plays: Anton Chekhov's A Marriage Proposal and a play based on Drunken Angel which starred many of the film's actors, including Mifune and Shimura.
When the Toho strike finally ended it resulted in a number of workers walking out and establishing the rival film studio Shintoho.
Disappointed in Toho management and its handling of the strike, Kurosawa himself left Toho and accepted an offer from Daiei studios for his next film.

Already before the latest Toho strike, Kurosawa, producer Sōjirō Motoki, and fellow directors and friends Kajiro Yamamoto, Mikio Naruse and Senkichi Taniguchi had formed a new independent production unit called Film Art Association (Eiga Geijutsu Kyōkai).
For the production unit's first work and his first film for Daiei, Kurosawa turned to a contemporary play by Kazuo Kikuta, and together with Taniguchi adapted it for the big screen.
The Quiet Duel starred Toshiro Mifune as a young doctor struggling with syphilis, a deliberate and arguably successful attempt by Kurosawa to break the actor away from being typecast as gangsters.
Released on March 13, 1949, the film was a box office success but is generally considered one of the director's lesser achievements.

As if to make up for the time lost due to the Toho strike, 1949 saw the production of no less than four more films co-written by Kurosawa.
Jakoman and Tetsu (Jakoman to Tetsu) and Escape at Dawn (Akatsuki no dasso) were co-written and directed by Senkichi Taniguchi, the latter released in January 1950, while The Lady from Hell (Jigoku no kifujin) was directed by Motoyoshi Oda.
The fourth film, released on October 17, was directed by Kurosawa himself, and called Stray Dog.

Like its predecessor, Stray Dog was produced by Film Art Association, but this time in collaboration with Shintoho and released through Toho.
The most celebrated of Kurosawa's immediate post-war works, it explores the mood and direction of post-war Japan while following a young detective played by Mifune and his obsession over a stolen hand gun.
Adapted from an unpublished novel written by Kurosawa in the vein of Georges Simenon, it was the director's first collaboration with screenwriter Ryuzo Kikushima, who would later help to script eight other Kurosawa films, while director Ishiro Honda worked on the film as a second unit director.

Immediately after Stray Dog, Kurosawa began production on his next work, Scandal.
Inspired by the director's personal experiences and anger towards yellow journalism, the film is an ambitious mixture of courtroom drama, questions about free speech, personal responsibility and post-war Japan, but it is generally considered a somewhat failed attempt.
Produced and distributed by Shochiku, Scandal had its premiere on April 30, 1950.

During the actual production of a film, Kurosawa was most concerned with capturing the action of the script as vividly as possible.
This involved careful work with his actors, and he often gave them great freedom to shape their own performances.
During the shooting of Drunken Angel, for example, Toshiro Mifune’s performance as a young gangster was so aggressive that Kurosawa feared it would unbalance the drama by overshadowing the main character of the alcoholic doctor (played by Takashi Shimura).
However, he was even more afraid of smothering Mifune’s immense vitality, so he let the actor do what he wanted.
Said Kurosawa: “In the end, although the title refers to the doctor, it is Mifune that everyone remembers.”

Beginning with Seven Samurai (1954), Kurosawa's cinematic technique changed drastically, through his extensive use in that film of telephoto lenses and multiple cameras.
The director claimed that he used these lenses and several cameras rolling at once to help the actors -- allowing them to be photographed at some distance from the cameras, without the knowledge of which particular camera's image would at any given moment represent the final "take" -- making their performances much more natural.
(Tatsuya Nakadai agreed that the multiple cameras did help his performances with the director.)
But these changes had a powerful effect as well on the look of the action scenes in that film, particularly the final battle in the rain.
"He can use the telephoto lenses to get under the horses, in between their hooves, to plunge us into the chaos of that battle in a visual way that is really quite unprecedented, both in Kurosawa’s own work and in the samurai genre as a whole."

For all his films, but particularly in his "period" pictures (jidai-geki), Kurosawa insisted on absolute authenticity.
The director felt that giving an actor in a jidai-geki a brand new costume made the character look less than plausible.
To resolve this, he often gave his cast their costumes weeks before the beginning of shooting, requiring them to wear them on a daily basis and "bond with them."
In some cases, such as with Seven Samurai, where most of the cast portrayed poor farmers, the actors were told to make sure the costumes were worn down and tattered by the time shooting started.

After finishing Scandal, Kurosawa was again approached by Daiei, who asked if the director would like to make another film for them.
Considering possible stories, Kurosawa picked a screenplay by the young screenwriter Shinobu Hashimoto.
It was based on Ryūnosuke Akutagawa's experimental short story "In a Grove" that recounts the murder of a samurai and the rape of his wife from various different and conflicting points of view, questioning the human ability to perceive and recount objective truths.
Kurosawa saw potential in the script, and with the help of Hashimoto polished and expanded the screenplay and then pitched it to Daiei, who picked the film happy with its low budget estimate.

Rashomon was the first of Kurosawa's nine films co-written with Hashimoto, and it was also the first film in which the director worked with script supervisor, continuity assistant and later overall principal assistant Teruyo Nogami, who continued to work with Kurosawa for the rest of the director's career.
Shooting Rashomon began on July 7 and wrapped on August 17, 1950, with the film going well over budget.
Just one week was spent in hurried post-production, and the finished film premiered at Tokyo's Imperial Theatre on August 25, expanding nationwide the day after.
The work was met by lukewarm reviews with many critics puzzled by its content, but it was nevertheless a moderate financial success for Daiei.

Soon after the release of Rashomon, Kurosawa was already working on his next film The Idiot, an adaptation of a Fyodor Dostoyevsky novel of the same name.
Produced by Shochiku and released on May 23, 1951, it relocates the story from Russia to Hokkaido but is otherwise fairly faithful to the original.
The film's close dependence on its source material has been seen by many as detrimental to the work, and combined with a studio-mandated cut which shortened it from Kurosawa's original 265 minutes to just 166, the resulting film is typically considered one of the director's least successful works.
Japanese reviews at the time were similarly negative, although the film nevertheless managed a moderate success at the box office, largely thanks to the popularity of actress Setsuko Hara.

However, unbeknownst to Kurosawa, Rashomon had meanwhile been entered to the prestigious Venice Film Festival, largely thanks to the insistence of Giuliana Stramigioli, a representative of an Italian film company who had convinced Daiei to submit the work against their own judgement.
On September 10, 1951, Rashomon was awarded the festival's highest prize the Golden Lion, surprising not only Daiei but also the international film world that at the time was largely unaware of Japanese cinema.
As the news reached Japan a few days later, Kurosawa was suddenly in demand again.

Boosted by his sudden international recognition, Kurosawa set out to work on his next film, Ikiru, which reunited him with film studio Toho.
The film stars Takeshi Shimura as a cancer-ridden Tokyo bureaucrat on his final quest for meaning before his death.
For the screenplay, Kurosawa brought in Shinobu Hashimoto, as well as screenwriter Hideo Oguni with whom he had previously worked on one Kajiro Yamamoto film, and who would go on to co-write altogether twelve Kurosawa films.
Pre-production commenced in January 1952 and filming lasted from March until September, with Ikiru opening on October 9 to rave reviews and enormous box office success.
Today, the film is one of Kurosawa's most discussed and best known works, perhaps second only to his next film, Seven Samurai.

In December 1952, Kurosawa took his Ikiru screenwriters Shinobu Hashimoto and Hideo Oguni for a forty five day secluded residence at an inn in order to create the screenplay for Seven Samurai.
Seven Samurai was Kurosawa's first samurai film, centring on a small farming village and a group of samurai who are hired to protect the villagers from an impending bandit attack.
The production turned out to be a massive undertaking, with three months spent in pre-production, a month of rehearsals, and a total of 148 shooting days spread over almost a year of filming that was interrupted by production and financing difficulties, as well as health problems for Kurosawa, who was suffering from exhaustion and ring worms.
The film finally opened on April 26, 1954, half a year behind its original release date and some three times over budget, at the time making it the most expensive Japanese film ever made.
Fortunately for Toho, the film was also a big success both critically and commercially, and quickly made back the money invested in it, and provided them a product that they could, and would, market internationally.

Kurosawa often remarked that he shot a film simply in order to have material to edit, because the editing of a picture was the most important and creatively interesting part of the process for him.
Kurosawa’s creative team believed that the director’s skill with editing was his greatest talent.
Said Hiroshi Nezu, a longtime production supervisor on his films, “Among ourselves, we think that he is Toho’s best director, that he is Japan’s best scenarist, and that he is the best editor in the world.
He is most concerned with the flowing quality which a film must have… The Kurosawa film flows over the cut, as it were.”

The director’s frequent crew member Teruyo Nogami confirms this view.
“Akira Kurosawa’s editing was exceptional, the inimitable work of a genius… No one was a match for him.” She claimed that Kurosawa carried in his head all the information about all shots filmed, and if, in the editing room, he asked for a piece of film and she handed him the wrong one, he would immediately recognize the error, though she had taken detailed notes on each shot and he had not.
She compared his mind to a computer, which could do with edited segments of film what computers do today.

Kurosawa’s habitual method – at variance with the standard Hollywood practice of editing a film only after all footage has been shot – was to edit a film daily, bit by bit, during production.
This helped particularly when he started using multiple cameras, which resulted in a large amount of film to assemble.
“I always edit in the evening if we have a fair amount of footage in the can.
After watching the rushes, I usually go to the editing room and work.” Because of this practice of editing as he went along, the post-production period for a Kurosawa film could be startlingly brief: Yojimbo had its Japanese premiere on April 20, 1961, four days after shooting concluded on April 16th.

Kazuko's birth in 1954 coincided with somewhat uncertain times in Japan.
United States and the Soviet Union, the two Cold War superpowers, had recently been involved in a war in Japan's neighbouring Korea, while nuclear bomb tests had intensified in the Pacific after the invention of the hydrogen bomb, a weapon hundreds of times more powerful than the bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki at the end of the Second World War.
These tests caused radioactive rainstorms in Japan, and one particular incident in March had exposed a Japanese fishing boat to nuclear fallout with disastrous results.

It is in this atmosphere that Kurosawa's next film, Record of a Living Being, was conceived, portraying an elderly factory owner terrified about the prospect of a nuclear attack and determined to move his family to safety in Brazil.
Production of the film began in May 19, 1955, with extensive preparation and rehearsals taking place before a relatively fast six-week shoot in August and September.
The shoot was much less demanding than the director's previous one, but a few days before the filming ended, Kurosawa's composer and collaborator Fumio Hayasaka passed away of tuberculosis at the age of 41.
The film's score was consequently finished by Hayasaka's student Masaru Satō, who would go on to score all of Kurosawa next eight films.

The commercial failure of Record of a Living Being did not prove a major hindrance for Kurosawa, who began working on his next film the following spring.
The project, an adaptation of William Shakespeare's Macbeth, was something that Kurosawa had originally wanted to make ten years earlier, but which he had at the time postponed due to Orson Welles's 1948 film version of the play.
Throne of Blood, as the film would be called, began shooting on June 29, 1956, and lasted until the end of the year.
Postproduction followed, and the film was released on January 15, 1957 to a slightly less negative domestic response than had been the case with Kurosawa's previous film.
Abroad Throne of Blood would, regardless of the liberties that it takes with its source material, quickly earn a place among the most celebrated Shakespeare adaptations.

After the Japanese premiere of The Lower Depths, Kurosawa embarked on his first trip to a western country, staying two weeks in London and attending the British premiere of Throne of Blood.
While there, he met the American director John Ford, whom Kurosawa considered as one of his biggest personal and artistic influences.
Kurosawa's biographer Stuart Galbraith IV notes that so influential was his meeting with Ford in 1957 that after returning from Europe, Kurosawa would adopt his American colleague's dressing style and from here on wear sunglasses and a wool cap on the set, a look that would become something of a trademark during the director's later career.

Kurosawa's three films following Seven Samurai had not managed to capture Japanese audiences in the way that the samurai film had, and studio profits were down.
Themes in the director's films had also been growing increasingly pessimistic and dark, with the possibility of individual redemption through personal responsibility that works such as The Quiet Duel and Stray Dog had promoted ten years earlier now very much questioned in Throne of Blood and The Lower Depths.
The director himself recognised this and aimed for a more light-hearted and entertaining film for his next production, while also contemplating a switch to the new widescreen film format that had been gaining popularity in Japan.

The resulting film, The Hidden Fortress, is an action-adventure that follows a medieval princess, her general, and two peasants who need to travel through enemy lines in order to reach their home prefecture.
The film, Kurosawa's first in widescreen, was loosely based on his earlier work The Men Who Tread on the Tiger's Tail and his 1942 script for Three Hundred Miles Through Enemy Lines, which had finally been filmed by Kazuo Mori for a December 1957 release.
Kurosawa began his production of The Hidden Fortress in spring 1958 with shooting commencing on the 27th of May, and lasting until December 11.
Another hurried post-production typical of Kurosawa followed, and the film was released on December 23.
The Hidden Fortress proved an enormous box office success in Japan, and was warmly received by critics as well.
Today, the film is generally considered Kurosawa's lightest and one of his least important, although it remains popular, not least because of the film's influence on George Lucas who would use The Hidden Fortress as basis for his 1977 space opera.

Kurosawa drew upon an enormous range of influences from cinematic, theatrical and literary traditions – both those of his native culture and of the West – in the creation his films.
According to his own statements, one of the strongest influences on Kurosawa was the cinema of the silent period.
Recalling, near the end of his life, a 1928 French Edgar Allen Poe adaptation, La Chute de la Maison Usher (The Fall of the House of Usher), directed by Jean Epstein, he said, “As you know, it's a silent movie… That power of expression.
Simply wonderful.
And before I start to make a movie, every time I try to imagine how I would have made this picture if it was a silent movie.” Prior to making Rashomon, he did extensive silent film research (with very limited resources at that time in Japan) to recapture that special aesthetic.
“Since the advent of the talkies in the 1930s, I felt, we had misplaced and forgotten what was so wonderful about the old silent movies… I believed that there was something to be learned from the spirit of the French avant-garde films of the 1920s… Rashomon would be my testing ground, the place where I could apply the ideas and wishes growing out of my silent film research.”

Among American sound film directors, Kurosawa held Frank Capra and John Ford in particular esteem.
Critics have asserted that, of the Japanese director's early films, both One Wonderful Sunday and Scandal owe a debt to Capra’s work in general, and the latter film includes scenes that appear to allude directly to It’s a Wonderful Life.
Kurosawa often cited Ford as one of his favorite directors: “There is one more film director I would like to resemble as I grow old: the late American film director John Ford.” and he identified My Darling Clementine as his favorite film by the director (“It’s a model of what cinema should be”).
(On the other hand, he once remarked, “I’m sure that my films do show some influence from John Ford, whose work I like very much, but I’m certainly not conscious of doing anything to imitate him.”)

Ford was, of course, an acknowledged master of the Western, and the influence of that genre (or lack of it) on Kurosawa’s work has been frequently discussed by critics and scholars, though there has been no consensus on the subject.
Donald Richie compares Yojimbo, for example, to such classic Westerns as Shane, Bad Day at Black Rock and High Noon.
Stephen Prince, on the other hand, maintains that Kurosawa “cannot simply make Westerns, since the social perceptions and the national tradition that they express are quite foreign Japan,” and cites a quote by the director, in which he remarked that he had learned from the “grammar” of the Western, to argue that Kurosawa utilized only “certain syntactic features” from the genre and not its content.
Joan Mellen asserts, “Questions of whether Kurosawa influenced Western films – or that they influenced him – are irrelevant to understanding him as a film-maker.”

So much attention has been given to the influence of Hollywood on Kurosawa that it is often overlooked that the classic European art cinema also inspired him.
In his autobiography, he lists the titles of nearly a hundred non-Japanese films he viewed during his youth, under the influence of his brother Heigo, and this list includes celebrated works by such continental directors as Ernst Lubitsch, Abel Gance, Carl Theodore Dreyer, F.W.
Murnau, Sergei Eisenstein and Jean Renoir.
The last-named director particularly impressed Kurosawa: he was a great admirer of Renoir’s Grand Illusion.
He described Renoir as “a warm and broad-minded person” when he met the Frenchman in Paris and later called him one of two major directors (the other being John Ford), compared to whom he himself, in his view, was “no more than a little chick.” Near the end of his life, he prepared a list of 100 favorite films, which included works by such distinguished postwar European figures as Roberto Rossellini, Federico Fellini, Jean-Luc Godard, Louis Malle, Francois Truffaut and Andrei Tarkovsky.

Starting with Rashomon, Kurosawa's productions had become increasingly large in scope and so had the director's budgets, sometimes as in the case of Seven Samurai going multiple times over their pre-production estimates.
Toho, concerned about this development, suggested to the director that he could help to finance his own works, therefore making Toho's potential losses smaller, while in turn allowing Kurosawa more artistic freedom as a co-producer.
Kurosawa agreed with the idea, and his production company Kurosawa Production was established in April 1959, with Toho as its majority share holder.

Despite now risking his own money, Kurosawa was not interested in creating a film solely aimed at securing box office success for the first film of his new production company.
On the contrary, he decided to take advantage of his increased creative freedom, and chose a story more directly critical of the Japanese business and political elite than had been the case with any of his previous works.
The work, The Bad Sleep Well, based on a script by Kurosawa's nephew Mike Inoue, is a revenge drama about a young man who climbs up in the hierarchy of a corrupt Japanese company with the aim of exposing the men responsible for his father's death.
Its theme proved very topical, and while the film was in production, mass demonstrations were held against a new U.S.-Japanese treaty, which was seen by many to threaten the country's young democracy by giving too much power to the hands of corporations and individual politicians.

Filming of The Bad Sleep Well began on March 28, 1960 and lasted for four months, with the first test screenings held on August 22.
The completed film opened on September 19 to a positive critical reaction, and proved a modest box office success.
Today, The Bad Sleep Well is generally considered something of a flawed masterpiece, with its first 25-minute act seen as one of the most skilfully executed sequences that Kurosawa ever filmed, but with the rest of the film somewhat failing to live up to its promise.

Following the completion of The Bad Sleep Well, Kurosawa embarked on his second trip to Europe, this time visiting the 1960 Summer Olympics in Rome, as well as several film festivals.
The director had been offered the role of directing a documentary of the upcoming 1964 Summer Olympics in Tokyo and, intrigued by the idea, the primary purpose of his trip was to familiarise himself with the event held in Rome.
Kurosawa's involvement with the production would last two and a half years, but the director would ultimately come to a disagreement with the film's producers over the proposed budget.
The project would ultimately be given to Kon Ichikawa, whose Tokyo Olympiad is now considered one of the finest documentary films of all time.

Seven Samurai was meanwhile being remade in the United States and released as a western under the title The Magnificent Seven, and Kurosawa also turned his attention to westerns and the samurai film genre.
Yojimbo, Kurosawa Production's second film, centres on a masterless super samurai who strolls into a town ruled by two opposing gangster groups and proceeds to destroy them.
In the film, Kurosawa plays with many genre conventions while at the same time offering a more realistic and graphically explicit portrayal of violence.
Shooting began on January 14, 1961 and wrapped on April 16, only four days before the film's premiere.
The film was an immense success at the box office, earning more than any Kurosawa film before.
Critical reaction was equally positive, and the film proved a major influence on its genre, immediately ushering in a new era of ultra-violent samurai films, disappointing Kurosawa who felt that this was very much the opposite of what his intention with Yojimbo had been.

Following the success of Yojimbo, Kurosawa found himself under pressure from Toho to create a sequel to the work.
Never before interested in revisiting his characters or stories, Kurosawa now turned to a script that he had written before Yojimbo, and reworked it to include the hero of his previous film.
Owing to this, Sanjuro, originally based on a Shūgorō Yamamoto novel and now sharing the same or at least a very similar protagonist as Yojimbo, is a film very different from its predecessor.
Lighter in tone, it is less influenced by the samurai and western genres, and closer to a conventional period film, with its story of a power struggle within a samurai clan portrayed with strong comic undertones.
Filming began on September 25, only five months after the production of Yojimbo had wrapped, and lasted until December 20, making it a relatively quick shot in Kurosawa's standards.
Once again, a one week post-production period followed, and the film opened on January 1st, 1962, quickly surpassing Yojimbos box office success and garnering similarly positive reviews from film critics.
Today, both films are generally considered among Kurosawa's finest works.

While working on Sanjuro, Kurosawa had already started preparations for his next film, instructing Toho to purchase film rights to King's Ransom, a hard-boiled crime novel about a kidnapping written by American author Ed McBain.
Once the production of Sanjuro wrapped, Kurosawa shifted his attention to the acquired property, and after writing the script together with his regular co-authors Ryuzo Kikushima, Hideo Ogumi and Eijirō Hisaita, preproduction of High and Low started on July 20, 1962.
The summer was spent in casting and rehearsals with filming beginning on September 2 and lasting for five months, wrapping on January 20, 1963.
The film, released on March 1, broke Kurosawa's box office record for the third film in a row, becoming the highest crossing Japanese film of the year and winning glowing reviews, further solidifying Kurosawa's critical and commercial standing.
While somewhat less well known today than many other Kurosawa films, it is nevertheless considered among his very best.

Enjoying his success and creative freedom, Kurosawa quickly moved onto his next project, Red Beard, which he envisioned as his largest and most demanding production yet.
Based on a short story collection by Shūgorō Yamamoto and incorporating elements from a Fyodor Dostoyevsky novel, it is a fairly sentimental period film with strong humanist themes set in an early nineteenth-century rural clinic.
The script was finished in July 1963, and a five-month pre-production period began, with filming finally commencing on December 21.
The shoot, Kurosawa's longest, lasted for over a year and wrapped in spring 1965, leaving the director, his crew and actors exhausted.

So long was the film's production period that before Red Beard went on wide release, altogether four other films had come out that bore Kurosawa's influence.
Kinji Fukasaku's Jakoman and Tetsu (Jakoman to Tetsu) was filmed from Kurosawa's screenplay, while Kurosawa himself produced Sanshiro Sugata, a remake of his first film and its sequel, filmed partly to cover the costs of making Red Beard.
Meanwhile, the American film The Outrage and the Italian A Fistful of Dollars premiered overseas, with the former a western based on Rashomon and the latter one based on Yojimbo.
As the Italians had made their film without permission, a lawsuit was launched against its producers and the film's director Sergio Leone.
Ultimately, the case was settled out of court, with Kurosawa and Toho receiving a portion of the Italian film's worldwide box office.

Red Beard premiered on April 3, 1965 and provided Kurosawa Production and Toho with yet another commercial hit, becoming the year's highest crossing Japanese film.
Together with the audience, Japanese critics responded extremely well to the work, and the film remains one of Kurosawa's best known and most loved in the country.
Internationally, critics have been more divided, with most commentators agreeing about its technical merits and many praising it as one of Kurosawa's best works, while others insisting that it lacks true complexity and genuine narrative power.

What most film critics agree on, however, is that Red Beard marks something of an end of an era for Kurosawa.
The director himself recognised this at the time of the film's release, telling film critic Donald Richie that a cycle of some kind had come to an end with Red Beard, and that his next films and production methods would be different.
Although unknown to Kurosawa at the time, his prediction proved very accurate.
Large changes would indeed take place, and the director would never enjoy the same kind of almost unrestricted financial freedom and critical and commercial success that he had for the past decade.
As an example of this, while Red Beard marks approximately the midway point in the director's career, he had by now directed altogether twenty-three films in twenty-two years, while he would only have the chance to make seven movies in the remaining twenty-eight years of his career.
For reasons never fully explained by the parties involved, Red Beard would also be his last work with actor Toshirō Mifune, Kurosawa's leading man for most of his career, therefore ending one of the most famous director-actor relationships in the history of cinema.

Kurosawa, now 55 years old, had in the past five years been more successful than ever, but Japanese film industry was struggling.
By the mid-1960s, television had overtaken cinema as the primary entertainment medium, and film productions had become smaller with studios less eager to take risks.
Kurosawa, whose exclusive contract with Toho came to an end in 1966, was also contemplating change.
Considering the state of the domestic film industry, and having already received dozens of offers from abroad, the idea of working outside of Japan seemed appealing to Kurosawa.

For his first project outside of Japan, Kurosawa chose a story based on a Life magazine article about a runaway train.
The action thriller, to be filmed in English and called simply Runaway Train, would be his first in colour, although made to look much like a black-and-white film with its snow-covered landscapes and black train engines.
Negotiations began in November 1965, and in the following June Kurosawa flew to New York to sign a contract with the American production company Embassy Pictures.
Kurosawa, working with a translated script in a language that he did not understand, would be the first major foreign filmmaker to make a film in Hollywood since the 1930s.
But the language barrier proved a major problem, and the English screenplay was not finished by the time filming was to begin in autumn 1966.
The shoot, which required snow, was then moved to autumn 1967, but by 1968 the project had been cancelled.
Some twenty years later, another foreigner working in Hollywood, Andrei Konchalovsky, would finally film Runaway Train.

Tora!, produced by 20th Century Fox and Kurosawa Production, would be a retelling of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor as told from an American and a Japanese point of view, with Kurosawa helming the Japanese part and an American director taking over the other half.
The deal was officially announced in April 1967, and Kurosawa spent several months working on the script with his co-writers Ryuzo Kikushima and Hideo Oguni, pushing for historical accuracy.
But as the project evolved, it did so increasingly unfavourably for Kurosawa.
The director to film the American sequences would not be David Lean as originally suggested, but the special effects specialist Richard Fleischer.
The budget was also cut, and there was talk about Kurosawa having to shoot partly in Hollywood.
Finally, the time allocated for his half would be only 90 minutes, which was a problem considering that the finished script for the Japanese half ran for over four hours.
Numerous revisions were subsequently written, with a more or less finalised cut-down version agreed on in May, 1968 – more than a year after the writing process had begun.

Kurosawa then turned his attention to sets, among other things commissioning a full-scale replica of battleship Nagato, while also announcing a cast composed of many first-time actors, including war veterans who were now prominent Japanese businessmen and industrialists.
Shooting began in early December, but Kurosawa would last only a little over three weeks.
On the set, he was struggling to work with an unfamiliar crew and the requirements of a Hollywood production, while his working methods puzzled his American producers, who ultimately concluded that the director must be mentally ill. On the 24th of December 1968, the Americans announced that Kurosawa had left the production due to fatigue, effectively firing him.

A legal battle about ownership and financial responsibilities followed, dragging all the way until early 1971.
In the process, facts began to emerge that some of the reason for production difficulties with not only Tora!
Tora!
Tora!
but also Runaway Train lay with people working at Kurosawa's own production company.
As a result, three prominent figures from Kurosawa Production resigned, and the company would not take part in another film production for over ten years.
But by now it was already too late to save either of Kurosawa's Hollywood projects, and the director had acquired a reputation that made it practically impossible for him to find other international projects.
As for Tora!
Tora!
Tora!, when released on September 23, 1970, it would not have Kurosawa's name on it following his request to have it removed, although its screenplay would remain his and his co-writers'.

Knowing that his reputation was at stake following the much publicised Tora!
Tora!
Tora!
debacle, Kurosawa tried to move quickly to a new project that would prove that he was still a viable film maker capable of box office success.
To his aid came friends and famed directors Masaki Kobayashi, Keisuke Kinoshita and Kon Ichikawa, who together with Kurosawa established a production company in July 1969 that they called Club of the Four Knights (Yonki no kai).
Although the plan was for the four directors to create a film each, it has been suggested that the real motivation for the three directors was simply to make it easier for Kurosawa to successfully complete a film, and therefore find his way back into the business.

The first film proposed and worked on was a period film called Dora-heita, but as it was deemed too expensive, attention shifted to Dodesukaden, Kurosawa's vignette-like adaptation of a Shūgorō Yamamoto novel, whose works had also provided the basis for Sanjuro and Red Beard.
The script, co-written with Hideo Oguni and Shinobu Hashimoto, was finished in just a week, and preproduction began on March 31, 1970.
Despite it being his first completed film in colour and his first film in standard ratio since The Lower Depths, the film was shot quickly for Kurosawa's standards, filming beginning on April 23 and finishing on June 29, with Kurosawa determined to show that he was still capable of working quickly and efficiently within a budget.
Before its release in Japan, Kurosawa travelled in August to Russia, where Dodesukaden was show at the Moscow International Film Festival garnering a positive reaction, with the Soviets suggesting that the director should make a film in their country.

While the film was in postproduction, Kurosawa had also had the chance to direct a television documentary titled Song of the Horse (Uma no uta) that premiered in August, but after Dodesukaden failed to re-establish him as a major box office figure in Japan, Kurosawa's options diminished.
Unable to secure funding for further work the following year and allegedly suffering from health problems, Kurosawa slit his wrists and throat on December 22, 1971, soon after relocating his family to a smaller place in Ebisu, Tokyo.
But the suicide attempt proved unsuccessful, and the director's health recovered fairly quickly, with Kurosawa now succumbing to domestic life, uncertain if he would ever direct another film again.

1972 passed without film work, but in early 1973 Kurosawa was suddenly contacted by the Russian film studio Mosfilm asking if he would be interested in working with them, like they had suggested a little over two years earlier.
Kurosawa agreed, proposing an adaptation of Russian explorer Vladimir Arsenyev's autobiographical work Dersu Uzala, something that he had been wanting to film since the 1930s.
A contract was signed on March 14, and work on the script began with Kurosawa collaborating with Russian writer Yuri Nagibin through translators and mail.
On December 11, Kurosawa set off to the Soviet Union with four of his closest aides, beginning a year and a half long stay in the country.
Early 1974 was spent in preproduction, with shooting beginning on May 27 in Siberia, and moving to Moscow early next year.
The production proved very demanding, but filming finally wrapped on April 28, 1975 and a month-long postproduction followed, with a thoroughly exhausted and home sick Kurosawa returning to Japan and his family on June 18.

Dersu Uzala had its world premiere in Japan on August 2, 1975, and did well at the box office.
While critical reception in Japan was muted, the film was better reviewed abroad, going on to win the Moscow International Film Festival's Golden Prize, as well as an Academy Award as the best foreign language film of the year.
Today, critics remain divided over the film, some seeing it as an example of Kurosawa's artistic decline, while others counting it among his finest works.

Despite the international success of Dersu Uzala, Kurosawa found himself again without work in the similarly struggling Japanese film industry, while his health was also failing following the demanding Russian production.
Although proposals for television projects were submitted to him, he had no interest in working outside of the film world.
Nevertheless, in order to maintain his family's lifestyle, the director agreed to appear on television ads for Suntory whiskey which aired in 1976.
While the prospects of the 66-year-old director's professional life seemed gloomy, there was more happiness to be found in his personal one, as his 21-year-old daughter Kazuko married in May 1976, and the following year Kurosawa became a proud grandfather.
And while again convinced that he might never be able to make another film, the director nevertheless continued working on potential projects, writing scripts and creating detailed illustrations for them with the intention of leaving behind a visual record of his plans in case he would never be able to film his stories.

In 1977, American director George Lucas had released, a wildly successful space opera which bore similarities to Kurosawa's The Hidden Fortress.
Lucas, like many other New Hollywood directors, considered Kurosawa a mentor, and was shocked to find out that the Japanese filmmaker was currently unable to secure financing for a new work.
With the help of Francis Ford Coppola, also an admirer of Kurosawa's works, Lucas contacted Kurosawa to see what could be done.
The two consequently met in San Francisco in July 1978 to discuss Kagemusha, a story of a man hired as the body double of a medieval Japanese lord and the project Kurosawa considered the most financially viable of the scripts that he had been working on since Dersu Uzala.
Lucas, enthralled by the screenplay and Kurosawa's illustrations, proceeded to use his influence over 20th Century Fox, coercing the studio that had fired Kurosawa just ten years earlier to now produce the director's next film.

The deal was announced on December 20, 1978, with Toho also joining in as a co-producer.
Production began the following April with Kurosawa in high spirits and with his health problems now appearing to have suddenly disappeared.
Filming lasted from June 1979 until March 1980 and turned out to be extremely demanding, with numerous incidents including the departure of the film's leading actor stretching the shoot, and the film finishing a few weeks behind schedule.
Kagemusha finally opened in Tokyo on April 27, 1980, and quickly became a massive hit in Japan.
The film was similarly a critical and box office success also abroad, winning the coveted Golden Palm at the 1980 Cannes Film Festival in May, and Kurosawa spending much of the rest of the year in Europe and America promoting Kagemusha, collecting awards and accolades, and exhibiting the drawings that he had made in preparation for the film.

The international success of Kagemusha meant that Kurosawa could also begin to think about his next project Ran, another epic in the vein of Kagemusha, but this time largely based on William Shakespeare's King Lear.
As Japanese studios continued to feel apprehensive about the idea of producing another film that would rank among the most expensive ever made in Japan, international help was again needed, this time coming from Europe in the form of French producer Serge Silberman, who agreed to finance the film.
Extensive preproduction work began in late 1982, but was halted in 1983 due to financing and other difficulties.
While waiting for the production of Ran to continue, Kurosawa began working on Modern Noh, a film documentary on Noh theatre.
He would, however, leave the documentary unfinished once the production of Ran could continue again, with filming beginning in December 1983 and lasting for more than a year.

In January 1985, production of Ran was halted again as Kurosawa's 64-year-old wife Yōko had fallen ill and the director wished to be by her bedside.
The illness proved fatal, with Yōko passing away on the 1st of February and Kurosawa subsequently returning to finish his film.
Now a month behind schedule, Ran was not able to make its intended premiere at the Cannes Film Festival, and instead premiered at the Tokyo Film Festival on May 31, with a wide release following the next day.
The film was a moderate financial success in Japan but a larger one abroad, and as he had done with Kagemusha, Kurosawa embarked on a trip to Europe and America, where he attended the film's premieres in September and October.

Kagemusha and Ran are generally considered to be among Kurosawa's finest works as well as remarkable examples of a director's late career.
However, the former film's status remains somewhat overshadowed by the latter, not least because of Kurosawa himself once suggesting that Kagemusha had functioned as something of a dress rehearsal for Ran, the film that he had really wished to make.
After Rans release, Kurosawa would point to it as the best film that he had ever made, a departure for the director who had previously always answered "my next one", when asked the question.

Nature is a crucial element in Kurosawa’s films.
According to Stephen Prince, "Kurosawa’s sensibility, like that of many Japanese artists, is keenly sensitive to the subtleties and beauties of season and scenery."
The director himself once said, "I like hot summers, cold winters, heavy rains and snows, and I think most of my pictures show this.
I like extremes because I find them most alive."
He has never hesitated to exploit climate and weather as plot elements, to the point where they become "active participants in the drama… The oppressive heat in Stray Dog and Record of a Living Being is omnipresent and becomes thematized as a signifier of a world disjointed by economic collapse and the atomic threat."

Wind is also a powerful symbol: "The persistent metaphor of Kurosawa’s work is that of wind, the winds of change, of fortune and adversity."
"The visually flamboyant battle Yojimbo takes place in the main street, as huge clouds of dust swirl around the combatants… The winds that stir the dust… have brought firearms to the town along with the culture of the West, which will end the warrior tradition."
It is also difficult not to notice the importance of rain to Kurosawa: "Rain in Kurosawa’s films is never treated neutrally.
When it occurs… it is never a drizzle or a light mist but always a frenzied downpour, a driving storm."
"The final battle Seven Samurai is a supreme spiritual and physical struggle, and it is fought in a blinding rainstorm, which enables Kurosawa to visualize an ultimate fusion of social groups… but this climactic vision of classlessness, with typical Kurosawan ambivalence, has become a vision of horror.
The battle is a vortex of swirling rain and mud… The ultimate fusion of social identity emerges as an expression of hellish chaos."

Kurosawa sometimes created, for dramatic contrast, adversarial characters that functioned as "doubles" of his heroic protagonists.
For his debut, Sanshiro Sugata, Kurosawa created an elegant, Westernized villain, Higaki (Ryunosuke Tsukigata), who issues a challenge to the hero, which Sugata first refuses, than accepts.
"Higaki, in fact," writes Stephen Prince, "is Sanshiro’s double, as he makes clear through similar actions that he has each character repeat."

In Stray Dog, the detective-hero, Murakami, slowly realizes that the pistol thief he is chasing, Yusa, is almost exactly like himself: a veteran without strong family ties who, like Murakami, had his army knapsack with all his belongings stolen, while returning from the war.
In the climactic scene, the detective has located the thief (who is now also a murderer) and fights him in a muddy field to arrest him and get his pistol back.
As Donald Richie describes this scene: "The camera looks at cop and robber, both so mud-covered that it is difficult to tell which is which.
They look identical… Man’s fight against evil is artificial, man himself is both hero and villain, in himself.” Stephen Prince takes a different view: "The thief and killer… represents a national self, crushed and deformed by the war and its aftermath, and recovery entails suppressing and abandoning this self.
In this sense, Yusa is Murakami’s evil double, a doppelgӓnger who must be symbolically apprehended."

In one of Kurosawa’s most discussed scenes, the conclusion of High and Low, the protagonist, Gondo, faces the taunting kidnapper who has ruined him – but there is a glass-and-wire barrier between them and the image of the face of each is reflected in the glass on his own side, so that, at times, the two faces seem to overlap one another.
As Richie writes, "We know two characters are not one – they are good and evil; they are opposite poles… Yet, here… Kurosawa is showing us something entirely different.
He is suggesting that, despite everything, good and evil are the same, that all men are equal."
Again, Prince disagrees: "These compositions do not make a statement about the equality or common humanity of the characters, any more than the bath of mud at the end of Stray Dog implied the equivalence of Murakami and Yusa… High and Low offers, finally, structures of separation, not humanistic reconciliation."

In Kagemusha, the great feudal Lord, Shingen Takeda, confronts his literal double: a thief who bears an uncanny resemblance to himself.
At first this thief, like the criminal in High and Low, taunts his “betters”: he has only stolen a few coins, after all, while Shingen, as a warlord, has murdered many, so which of them is the real criminal?
In this, Prince sees a momentary reassertion of "the critique of economic and political oppression that sustained and lifted Seven Samurai to greatness."
But then Shingen points out to the thief that his savagery serves a higher purpose: to unify the nation in order to end the civil wars and prevent even greater bloodshed.
After the thief grasps this, he begins to be transformed from antagonist to disciple – but one who, as noted above, can only follow his master to the grave.

For the first time in over forty years, Kurosawa wrote the screenplay alone, a process which took him around two months.
The project was personal, not only because of its subject matter but also due to those now working with him.
While his son Hisao had already helped him during the production of Kagemusha and Ran, earning an associate producer's credit for the latter, he now took the role of a principal producer together with Mike Inoue, Kurosawa's nephew whose script had thirty years earlier worked as the basis for The Bad Sleep Well.
Additionally, Kurosawa's daughter Kazuko would work at the wardrobe department under Emi Wada, who had won an Academy Award for her work on Ran, while a long-time friend and fellow director Ishirō Honda worked as a second unit director.

Although its estimated budget was lower than with his previous films, Japanese studios were still unwilling to back a Kurosawa production, and so Kurosawa turned again to foreign investors.
This time, he found a supporter in American filmmaker Steven Spielberg, who convinced Warner Bros. to buy the international rights to the completed film.
This made it easier for Hisao, who was by now about to take over as the head of Kurosawa Production, to negotiate a loan that would cover the film's actual production costs.
With financing secured, shooting began on January 10, 1989, and took more than eight months to complete.
Dreams premiered at Cannes on May 10, 1990 to a polite but muted reception, which was repeated when the film was released around the world.

Although his last two films had not acquired the kind of critical and commercial success that Kagemusha and Ran had enjoyed, Kurosawa wasted no time moving onto his next project, which he called Madadayo, or Not Yet.
Based on autobiographical essays by Hyakken Uchida, the film follows the German professor's life through the Second World War and beyond, centring on yearly birthday celebrations with his former students where the protagonist declares his lack of intention to die quite yet, a topic that was becoming increasingly topical for the film's director.
The production was announced in early 1992 and filming began in February that year progressing ahead of schedule and wrapping by the end of September.
Its release on April 17, 1993, was greeted by an even more hostile and disappointed reaction than had been the case with his two previous works.

Kurosawa nevertheless continued to work after Madadayo.
In 1993, the now 83-year-old director wrote the screenplay for The Sea is Watching, and in 1995 he completed After the Rain.
The screenplays were later filmed by Kei Kumai in 2002 and Takashi Koizumi in 1999, respectively.
For, while putting finishing touches on the latter work in 1995, Kurosawa slipped and broke the base of his spine.
Following the accident, he would be confined to a wheelchair for the rest of his life, putting an end to any hopes of him directing another film again.

Beginning with Throne of Blood (1957), what Stephen Prince calls "the countertradition to the committed, heroic mode of Kurosawa’s cinema" first appears: an obsession with historical cycles of inexorable savage violence.
According to Donald Richie, within the world of that film, "Cause and effect is the only law.
Freedom does not exist."
and Prince claims that its events "are inscribed in a circle of time that infinitely repeats."
(He uses as evidence the fact that Washizu’s lord, unlike the kindly Duncan of Shakespeare’s play, had murdered his own lord years before to seize power, and is then murdered in turn by Washizu for the same reason.)
"The fated quality to the action of Macbeth was transposed by Kurosawa with a sharpened emphasis upon predetermined action and the crushing of human freedom under the laws of karma."

Prince claims that Kurosawa’s last epics, Kagemusha and particularly Ran, mark a major turning point in the director’s vision of the world.
In Kagemusha, "where once the world of his films the individual could grasp events tightly and demand that they conform to his or her impulses, now the self is but the epiphenomenon of a ruthless and bloody temporal process, ground to dust beneath the weight and force of history."
The following epic, Ran, is “a relentless chronicle of base lust for power, betrayal of the father by his sons, and pervasive wars and murders."
The film is "a commentary on what Kurosawa now perceives as the timelessness of human impulses toward violence and self-destruction."
"History has given way to a perception of life as a wheel of endless suffering, ever turning, ever repeating," which is compared in many instances in the screenplay with hell.
"Kurosawa has found hell to be both the inevitable outcome of human behavior and the appropriate visualization of his own bitterness and disappointment."

Virtually all commentators have noted Kurosawa’s bold, dynamic style, which many have compared to the traditional Hollywood style of narrative moviemaking, one that emphasizes, in the words of one such scholar, "chronological, causal, linear and historical thinking."
But it has also been claimed that, from his very first film, the director displayed a technique quite distinct from the seamless style of classic Hollywood.
This technique involved a disruptive depiction of screen space through the use of numerous unrepeated camera setups, a disregard for the traditional 180-degree axis of action around which Hollywood scenes have usually been constructed, and an approach in which “narrative time becomes spatialized,” with fluid camera movement often replacing conventional editing.
The following are some idiosyncratic aspects of the artist’s style.
In his films of the 1940s and 1950s, Kurosawa frequently employs the "axial cut," in which the camera moves closer to (or further away from) the subject, not through the use of tracking shots or dissolves, but through a series of matched jump cuts.
For example, in Sanshiro Sugata II, the hero takes leave of the woman he loves, but then, after walking away a few feet, turns and bows to her, and then, after walking a bit further, turns and bows once more.
This sequence of shots (illustrated on film scholar David Bordwell's blog) is reproduced on this page.
The three shots are not connected in the film by camera movements or dissolves, but by a series of two jump cuts.
The effect is to stress the duration of Sanshiro's departure.

In the opening sequence of Seven Samurai in the peasant village, the axial cut is used twice.
When the villagers are outdoors, gathered in a circle, weeping and lamenting the imminent arrival of the bandits, they are glimpsed from above in extreme long shot, then, after the cut, in a much closer shot, then in an even closer shot, until finally the viewer is at ground level, and the dialogue begins.
A few minutes later, when the villagers go to the mill to ask the village elder's advice, there is a long shot of the mill, with a slowly turning wheel in the river, then a closer shot of this wheel, and then a still closer shot of it.
(As the mill is where the elder lives, these shots forge a mental association in the viewer's mind between that character and the mill.)
A number of scholars have pointed out Kurosawa’s tendency to “cut on motion”: that is, to edit a sequence of a character or characters in motion so that an action is depicted in two or more separate shots, rather than one uninterrupted shot.
A commentator, as an example, describes a tense scene in Seven Samurai in which the samurai Shichiroji, who is standing, wishes to console the peasant Manzo, who is sitting on the ground, and he gets down on one knee to talk to him.
Kurosawa chooses to film this simple action in two shots rather than one (cutting between the two only after the action of kneeling has begun) to fully convey Shichiroji’s humility.
Numerous other instances of this device are evident in the movie.

Goodwin also points out that in The Lower Depths, in which Kurosawa completely avoided wipes, the director cleverly manipulated people and props “in order to slide new visual images in and out of view much as a wipe cut does.”  Kurosawa by all accounts always gave great attention to the soundtracks of his films (Teruyo Nogami’s memoir gives many such examples).
In the late 1940s, he began to employ music for what he called "counterpoint" to the emotional content of a scene, rather than merely to reinforce the emotion, as Hollywood traditional did (and still does).
The inspiration for this innovation came from a family tragedy.
When news reached Kurosawa of his father's death in 1948, he wandered aimlessly through the streets of Tokyo.
His sorrow was magnified rather than diminished when he suddenly heard the cheerful, vapid song "The Cuckoo Waltz", and he hurried to escape from this "awful music."
He then told his composer, Fumio Hayasaka, with whom he was working on Drunken Angel, to use "The Cuckoo Waltz" as ironic accompaniment to the scene in which the dying gangster, Matsunaga, sinks to his lowest point in the narrative.

"Ah, counterpoint," said Hayasaka.
"Right.
The Sharpshooter," Kurosawa answered.
This referred to a Soviet film both men had liked (which Teruyo Nogami more accurately refers to as The Sniper), a World War I drama in which, during a scene in which an enemy sniper is stabbed to death, cheerful French music is heard by the characters.
By using "The Cuckoo Waltz" rather than sad music during a grim scene, Kurosawa and Hayasaka sought to emulate the dramatic effect they so admired in the earlier movie.

This ironic approach to music can also be found in Stray Dog, a film released a year after Drunken Angel.
In the climactic scene, the detective Murakami is fighting furiously with the murderer Yusa in a muddy field.
The sound of a Mozart piece is suddenly heard, played on the piano by a woman in a nearby house.
As one commentator notes, "In contrast to this scene of primitive violence, the serenity of the Mozart is, literally, other-worldly" and "the power of this elemental encounter is heightened by the music."
Nor was Kurosawa’s "ironic" use of the soundtrack limited to music.
One critic observes that, in Seven Samurai, "During episodes of murder and mayhem, birds chirp in the background, as they do in the first scene when the farmers lament their seemingly hopeless fate."
Many commentators have noted the frequent occurrence in Kurosawa’s work of the complex relationship between an older and a younger man, who serve each other as master and disciple, respectively.

Kurosawa’s is a heroic cinema, a series of dramas (mostly) concerned with the deeds and fates of larger-than-life heroes.
Stephen Prince has identified the emergence of the unique Kurosawa protagonist with the immediate postwar period, when the aim of the American Occupation to replace Japanese feudalism with individualism coincided with the director’s artistic and social agenda: "Kurosawa welcomed the changed political climate and sought to fashion his own mature cinematic voice."
The Japanese critic Tadao Sato concurs: "With defeat in World War II, many Japanese… were dumbfounded to find that the government had lied to them and was neither just nor dependable.
During this uncertain time Akira Kurosawa, in a series of first-rate films, sustained the people by his consistent assertion that the meaning of life is not dictated by the nation but something each individual should discover for himself through suffering."
The filmmaker himself remarked that, during this period, "I felt that without the establishment of the self as a positive value there could be no freedom and no democracy."

The first such postwar hero was, curiously, a woman – Yukie, played by Setsuko Hara, in No Regrets for Our Youth."
desertion of family and class background to assist a poor village, her perseverance in the face of enormous obstacles, her assumption of responsibility for her own life and for the well-being of others, and her existential loneliness… are essential to Kurosawan heroism and make of Yukie the first coherent… example."
This "existential loneliness" is also exemplified by Dr. Sanada (Takashi Shimura) in Drunken Angel: "Kurosawa insists that his heroes take their stand, alone, against tradition and battle for a better world, even if the path there is not clear.
Separation from a corrupt social system in order to alleviate human suffering, as Sanada does, is the only honorable course."

Behind these values lies the keen awareness of the filmmaker of class distinctions and the realities of poverty.
Referring to the cruel, impoverished kidnapper in High and Low, Joan Mellen writes, "Appalled as he is by kidnapper’s brutality, Kurosawa does not believe that some should live in mansions high on a hill overlooking the squalor of the working poor, confined to three tatami rooms, freezing in winter, stifling in summer."
(Mellen goes on to trace the director’s class consciousness to his brief membership in the Marxist Proletarian Artists League in the late 1920s.)

Many commentators regard Seven Samurai as the ultimate expression of the artist’s heroic ideal.
Joan Mellen’s comments are typical of this view: "Seven Samurai is above all a homage to the samurai class at its most noble… Samurai for Kurosawa represent the best of Japanese tradition and integrity."
The leader of the samurai, Kambei, is a hero not only because he takes pity on the farmers’ poverty and oppression, but because he teaches them to transcend their petty self-interest.
In a scene exactly halfway through the film, Kambei informs the community that the fields will have to be flooded to protect the village from bandits, even though this will require the abandonment of three outlying houses.
When the owners of those houses rebel against this decision and try to run off, Kambei, literally and figuratively, forces them back into line.
He then declares: "We can’t endanger twenty for three… He who thinks only about himself will destroy himself, too."
Later, Mosuke (one of the owners of the three houses), watching those houses set on fire by the bandits, dismisses them as "worthless shacks," revealing that he has learned from Kambei to put the common good above his own.

As Kurosawa’s career progressed, however, he seemed to find it increasingly difficult to sustain the heroic ideal.
As Prince notes, "Kurosawa’s is an essentially tragic vision of life, and this sensibility… impedes his efforts to realize a socially committed mode of filmmaking."
He also observes that, although Seven Samurai "embodies a belief in the centrality of class exploitation… and searches for an alternative,… an end to class differentiation would also mean an end to heroes, to those extraordinary individuals whose supremacy to the masses has constituted a moral example… central to Kurosawa’s narratives."
Furthermore, the director’s ideal of heroism is subverted by history itself: "When history is articulated as it is in Throne of Blood, as a blind force… heroism ceases to be a problem or a reality."
According to Prince, the filmmaker’s vision eventually became so bleak that he would come to view history merely as eternally recurring patterns of violence, within which the individual is depicted as not only unheroic, but utterly helpless (see “” below).