In the US, it reached No.
6 on Billboard Hot 100 paving the way for the first ABBA album there.
While it didn't exactly set the charts alight peaking at No.145 on Billboard album chart, the reviews were overwhelmingly positive.
Ken Barnes in Rolling Stone wrote that "Abba's emergence is one of the most cheering musical events of recent months", describing the album as "one of those infinitely playable records with a wealth of outstanding tracks", while reviewer in Creem called it a "perfect blend of exceptional, lovable compositions ranging from bubblegum to psychedelic freakouts".
Even music critic of such "serious" publication like Washington Post heard in the album "a playful spirit cutting loose" and saw it a "work overloaded with enchantments of childhood - hula hoops, a candy store, King Kong, smooching during recess, every carefree delight wrapped into one fun-filled package".

The success of the group in the United States, however, remained uneven.
While they managed to break into the singles market there where by early 1976 they already had 4 Top 30 singles, the album market so far proved to be hard to break into.
The eponymous "ABBA" album generated no less than three US hits, and yet it peaked only at No.165 on Cashbox chart and No.174 on Billboard chart.
Oddly enough, reviews again were very positive.
Phil Alexander in Cashbox magazine enthused that it's "one of the most expertly engineered and mixed collaborations of its genre.
That genre lies somewhere between the structural ingenuity of Bela Bartok and rockabilly of Elton John".
Reviewer in Creem noted that "every song on this album has hit potential...contains so many good tunes that mind boggles", while Andy McKaie in Crawdaddy!
magazine decribed the album as "buoyant high-flying, heavily produced pop-rocking fluff with a glossed-over power bottom, recalling The Mamas and The Papas, The Andrews Sisters and The Turtles".

Simon Frith & Peter Langley writing in Creem magazine summed up ABBA's current success in the following way: "In all the world except America (which was too busy celebrating centennials and electing presidents) 1976 was the Year of Abba.
In Britain, for example, Abba had three successive number one singles and their new one, "Money, Money, Money", is climbing the Top Ten as we write.
Abba's Greatest Hits was the year's biggest selling album and the advance orders on its successor, Arrival, were so huge that CBS's European pressing plants were tied up for weeks.
And Britain has only been following world trends.
The most intense outbreak of Abba-mania so far actually occurred in Australia where all attendance records have been broken and Abba's tour hasn't even started yet!

New York Times music critic John Rockwell met ABBA in Stockholm in early 1978 and wrote: "Abba represents a healthy challenge to the two-decades-long dominance of Western pop music by Britain and the United States.
The musical context from which Abba evolved is that of so-called Euro-pop - a flossy, bouncy, sometimes triumphantly silly fluff-music that derives not from the urgency of American blues (the source of rock), but from older forms of European folk music....
This band represents as refreshing an example of pure pop as anything being done today.
Pop music used to be simply and unaffectedly entertaining, back before rock-and-roll.
At its best, rock still lifts popular music into a new seriousness and intensity.
But too often it's merely raucous or pretentious, and in the meantime, middle-of-the-road alternatives wallow in sentimentality and schlock.
Abba is both energetic and mightily fun - rather like Fleetwood Mac, although stemming from a different set of traditions...records are a testimony to vitality and charm."

Contrary to a widespread notion, ABBA did achieve a major success in the United States.
During their active career, from 1974 to 1982 fourteen of their singles reached Top 40 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart and on Cashbox Top 100 singles chart, ten of them reached Top 20 and four of them placed in Top 10 on both charts, with "Dancing Queen" peaking at No.1 also on both charts.
While Fernando and SOS didn't break Top 10 on Billboard Hot 100 chart they reached Top 10 on Cashbox ("Fernando) and Record World ('SOS") charts.

The group also had twelve Top 20 singles on Billboard Adult Contemporary chart with two of them, Fernando and The Winner Takes It All, reaching No.1.
Lay All Your Love On Me was ABBA's fourth No.1 single on Billboard charts topping its Hot Dance Club Play chart.
Dancing Queen and Take A Chance On Me singles were certified gold (more than 1 million copies sold) by RIAA.

Nine ABBA albums made its way into the Top 100 on Billboard 200 album chart with seven of them getting into the Top 50.
Four of those albums reached Top 20 with "ABBA The Album" at No.14 being the highest position.
Five albums received RIAA gold (more than 500,000 copies sold) certification, and three acquired platinum (more than 1 million copies sold) status.
ABBA Gold: Greatest Hits collection released in the US in 1993 became a 6-time platinum bestseller and reached No.7 on Bilboard Top Pop Catalog Albums chart.

After receiving little attention during the acme of punk and new wave in the mid and late 1980s, ABBA experienced a major resurgence in the new decade: starting with UK synth-pop duo Erasure's release of a maxi single with cover versions of ABBA songs topping the charts in the spring of 1992.
As U2 arrived Stockholm for a concert in June 1992, the band paid their homage to ABBA by inviting Björn and Benny to join them onstage for a rendition of "Dancing Queen", playing guitar and keyboards.
The September 1992 release of ABBA Gold, a new Greatest Hits compilation album which ended up selling massively worldwide and setting chart longevity records.

In 1994, two Australian movies caught world media focus, both focussing on admiration for ABBA: "The Adventures Of Priscilla, Queen Of The Desert" and "Muriel's Wedding".
The same year, a four-disc box set with all the hits and standout album tracks was released with the envolvement from all four members: Thank You For The Music (box set).
A dive into the Polar vaults resulted in the discovery of several demo versions and odd tracks for this release.

Soon ABBA was recognized and embraced also by other acts: Kurt Cobain and Courtney Love professed to be fans, R.E.M.
performed Does Your Mother know live, Evan Dando of The Lemonheads recorded what fans consider the best cover version of Knowing Me, Knowing You, Sinéad O'Connor recorded Chiquitita, Tanita Tikaram did as Blancmange; paying tribute to The Day Before You Came.
Tribute albums were released both in Sweden and the UK, and Cover Bands such as Bjorn Again and Arrival found a market; the former had to puit together several incarnations of themselves to cover the huge interest!

In Sweden, the growing recognition of the legacy of Björn and Benny resulted in the 1998 B & B Concerts; a tribute concert (with swedish singers who had worked with the composers through the years) showcasing not only their ABBA years, but even hits from the 1960's and after ABBA.
The concert was a huge success, got released on cd, and later toured Scandinavia and even went to Bejing in China for two concerts.
The year after, Sweden saw the birth of ABBA Teens, later re-named A-Teens, recording techno-pop versions of ABBA songs to huge success world wide: not only the english original versions, but also ABBAs spanish versions were covered with the spanish market in mind.