In 1944, van Vogt moved to Hollywood, California, where his writing took on new dimensions after World War II.
van Vogt was always interested in the idea of all-encompassing systems of knowledge (akin to modern meta-systems), the characters in his very first story used a system called 'Nexialism' to analyze the alien's behaviour, and he became interested in the General Semantics of Alfred Korzybski.
And he was profoundly affected by revelations of totalitarian police states that emerged after WWII.
He subsequently wrote three novels merging these overarching themes, The World of Null-A and The Pawns of Null-A in the late 1940s, and Null-A Three in the early 1980s.
Null-A, or non-Aristotelian logic, refers to the capacity for, and practice of, using intuitive, inductive reasoning (fuzzy logic), rather than reflexive, or conditioned, deductive logic.

van Vogt systematized his writing method, using scenes of 800 words or so where a new complication was added or something resolved.
Several of his stories hinge upon temporal conundrums, a favorite theme of his.
He said many of his ideas from dreams, and indeed his stories at times had the incoherence of dreams, but at their best, as in the fantasy novel The Book of Ptath, his works had all the vision and power a dream can impart.

In the 1950s, van Vogt briefly became involved in L. Ron Hubbard's Dianetics, even operating a storefront for the emerging sect in the Los Angeles area for a time, before winding up at odds with Hubbard and his methods.
His writing more or less stopped for some years, a period in which he bitterly claimed to have been harassed and intimidated by Hubbard's followers.
He resumed writing again in the 1960s, while remaining in Hollywood.
In 1946, Van Vogt and his first wife, E. Mayne Hull, were co-Guests of Honor at the fourth World Science Fiction Convention,

In 1980, van Vogt received a 'Casper Award' (precursor to the Canadian Aurora Awards) for Lifetime Achievement.
In 1996, van Vogt was recognized on three occasions: the Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America (SFWA) designated him a 'Grand Master', the World Science Fiction Convention presented him with a Special Award for six decades of golden age science fiction, and the [[Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame included him among its initial four inductees.
Noted sci-fi author Philip K. Dick has said van Vogt's stories spurred his interest in science fiction, with their strange sense of the unexplained, that something more was going on than the protagonists realized.

"Van Vogt knew precisely what he was doing in all areas of his fiction writing.
There's hardly a wasted word in his stories...His plots are marvels of interlocking pieces, often ending in real surprises and shocks, genuine paradigm shifts, which are among the hardest conceptions to depict.
And the intellectual material of his fictions, the conceits and tossed-off observations on culture and human and alien behavior, reflect a probing mind...Each tale contains a new angle, a unique slant, that makes it stand out."
Paul Di Filippo  ', Alan Nicoll