The terms agnosticism and agnostic were invented by Huxley in 1869 to describe the philosophical and religious attitude insisting that people can have scientific or real knowledge of phenomena only.
When it comes to what may lie behind phenomena—God, immortality, etc.—there can be no evidence that entitles anyone either to deny or affirm anything.
Essential to Huxley's use of the term was the belief that the unexistence or existence of God, immortality, and the like are inherently unknowable.

The term has many uses, however, most in fundamental disagreement with the others.
One alternative first suggested by Huxley states, "In matters of the intellect, follow your reason as far as it will take you, without regard to any other consideration.
And negatively: In matters of the intellect, do not pretend that conclusions are certain which are not demonstrated or demonstrable" (Huxley, Agnosticism, 1889).
A. W. Momerie has noted that this is nothing but a definition of honesty.
Huxley's usual definition went beyond mere honesty, however, and he insisted that these metaphysical issues were fundamentally unknowable.

The term may also be applied to The attitude is as old as scepticism.
But the expressions "agnostic" and "agnosticism" were applied by Huxley to sum up his deductions from contemporary developments of metaphysics about the "unconditioned" (Hamilton) and the "unknowable" (Herbert Spencer).
It is important, therefore, to discover Huxley's own views on the matter.
Though Huxley began to use the term "agnostic" in 1869, his opinions had taken shape some time before that date.
In a letter to Charles Kingsley (September 23, 1860) he discussed his beliefs extensively: And again, to the same correspondent, the 6th of May 1863: Of the origin of the name "agnostic" to cover this attitude, Huxley gave (Coll.
Ess.
v. pp.
237-239) the following account: This account is confirmed by R. H. Hutton, who in 1881 wrote that the word "was suggested by Huxley at a meeting held previous to the formation of the now defunct Metaphysical Society at Mr Knowles's house on Clapham Common in 1869, in my hearing.
He took it from St Paul's mention of the altar to the Unknown God."
Hutton here gives a variant etymology for the word, which may be therefore taken as partly derived from fi-yvowTos (the "unknown" God), and partly from an antithesis to "gnostic"; but the meaning remains the same in either case.
The name, as Huxley said, "took"; it was constantly used by Hutton in the Spectator and became a fashionable label for contemporary unbelief in Christian dogma.

Hutton himself frequently misrepresented the doctrine by describing it as "belief in an unknown and unknowable God"; but agnosticism as defined by Huxley meant not belief, but absence of belief, as much distinct from belief on the one hand as from disbelief on the other; it was the half-way house between the two, where all questions were "open."
All that Huxley asked for was evidence, either for or against; but this he believed it impossible to get.
Occasionally he too misstated the meaning of the word he had invented, and described agnosticism as meaning" that a man shall not say he knows or believes, what he has no scientific ground for professing to know or believe.
"But as the late Rev> A. W. Momerie remarked, this would merely be "a definition of honesty; in that sense we ought all to be agnostics."

Agnosticism really rests on the doctrine of the Unknowable, the assertion that belief about certain objects—among them the Deity— can never have any "scientific" ground.
This way of solving, or passing over, the ultimate problems of thought has had many followers.
It has been popular in cultured and scientific circles that were tired of dogmatic creeds of contemporary orthodoxy.
The support of agnosticism by eminent physicists like Huxley greatly influenced modern metaphysical speculations and even the form that subsequent Christian apologetics adopted.

A similar effect has been produced by the philosophical reaction against Herbert Spencer, and by the perception that the canon of evidence required in physical science must not be exalted into universal rules of thought.
It does not follow that justification by faith must be eliminated in spiritual matters where sight cannot follow.
The physicist's duty and success lie in pinning belief solely on verification by physical phenomena, when they alone are in question.
For mankind generally, though possibly not for an exceptional man like Huxley, an impotent suspension of judgment on such issues as a future life or the Being of God is both unsatisfying and demoralizing.

It is impossible here to do more than indicate the path out of the difficulties raised by Huxley in the letter to Kingsley quoted above.
They involve an elaborate discussion, not only of Christian evidences, but of the entire subject-matter alike of Ethics and Metaphysics, of Philosophy as a whole, and of the philosophies of individual writers who have dealt in their different ways with the problems of existence and epistemology.
Huxley's challenge ("I know what I mean when I say I believe in the law of the inverse squares, and I will not rest my life and my hopes upon weaker convictions") is one which a spiritualistic philosophy need not shrink from accepting at the hands of naturalistic agnosticism.
If, as Huxley admits, even putting it with unnecessary force against himself, "the immortality of man is not half so wonderful as the conservation of force or the indestructibility of matter," the question then is how far a critical analysis of our belief in the last-named doctrines will leave us in a position to regard them as the last stage in systematic thinking.

In order to understand this logic of Agnosticism section, it is helpful to understand the correct parsing of statements of belief or knowledge.
Such statements are not about facts, but about other statements.
In the jargon of the logician, they are second-order predicates.

4.
Agreeing with God Exists AND the statement God does not exist implies agreement with the statement God Exists & God does not exist.
This embrace of contradiction is often found in eastern thought.
Similarly, the agnostic position implies that the agnostic does not agree with the statement God Exists & God does not exist.

There are two other points to note.
The first is that it is unnecessary to draw a distinction between belief and knowledge; to claiming agnosticism is about knowledge, while atheism/theism is about belief.
Since knowledge implies belief, one cannot intelligibly know that X is and not also believe that X is.

In 1879, as Darwin was writing his autobiography, a letter came asking if he believed in God, and if theism and evolution were compatible.
He replied that a man "can be an ardent Theist and an evolutionist", citing Charles Kingsley and Asa Gray as examples, and for himself, he had "never been an Atheist in the sense of denying the existence of a God".
He added that "I think that generally (and more and more as I grow older), but not always, that an Agnostic would be a more correct description of my state of mind."

On Thursday 28 September 1881 Darwin was visited by the atheists Doctor Ludwig Büchner and Edward Aveling (later the partner of Eleanor Marx).
Darwin's son Frank was present, and Darwin's wife Emma Darwin invited their old friend the Revd.
Brodie Innes.
Darwin wittily explained that " & I have been fast friends for 30 years.
We never thoroughly agreed on any subject but once and then we looked at each other and thought one of us must be very ill".
In discussions after dinner Darwin asked his guests "Why do you call yourselves Atheists?
", saying that he preferred the word "Agnostic".
Aveling replied that "Agnostic was but Atheist writ respectable, and Atheist was only Agnostic writ agressive".
Darwin responded by asking "Why should you be so aggressive?
", wondering what was to be gained from forcing new ideas on people when freethought was "all very well" for the educated, but were ordinary people "ripe for it?"
Aveling then asked what if "the revolutionary truths of Natural and Sexual Selection" had been confined to the "judicious few" and he had delayed publication of the Origin, where would the world be?
Surely "his own illustrious example" encouraged freethinkers to proclaim truth "abroad from the house-tops", but while Darwin agreed that Christianity was "not supported by the evidence", he had been in no rush to force this idea on anyone and in fact "I never gave up Christianity until I was forty years of age."

Enlightenment philosopher David Hume proved that meaningful statements about the universe are always qualified by some degree of doubt.
We fallible human beings cannot obtain absolute certainty except in trivial cases where a statement is true by definition (as in, "all bachelors are unmarried" or "all triangles have three sides").
All rational statements that assert a factual claim about the universe that begin "I believe that...." are simply shorthand for, "Based on my knowledge, understanding, and interpretation of the prevailing evidence, I tentatively believe that...." For instance, when I say, "I believe that Lee Harvey Oswald shot John F. Kennedy," I'm not asserting an absolute truth but a tentative belief based on my interpretation of the assembled evidence.
Even though I'll set my alarm clock tonight before retiring because "I believe the sun will rise tomorrow," even that belief is tentative, tempered by a small but finite degree of doubt (the sun might explode; the earth could be shattered in collision with a rogue asteroid; God might cancel His creation).

In that light, what sets apart agnosticism from the general skepticism that permeates modern Western philosophy?
First, it's the nature of god that is at the crux of the issue, not whether god merely exists.
If, for example, god existed but he were an immortal flea, few of us would devote our lives to his worship, dedicate our time to his service, or produce long-winded entrees on the matter for the edification of Wikipedia readers.
So the nature and attributes of god are of foremost concern, not whether he's merely "out there."

Agnosticism maintains that the nature and attributes of god are beyond the grasp of man's finite and limited mind; those divine attributes transcend human comprehension.
The concept of God is just too big a subject to wrap our minds around.
Humans might apply terms such as those found in the Catholic Encyclopedia that attempt to characterize god, terms such as "infinitely perfect spiritual substance," "omnipotent," "eternal," "incomprehensible," "infinite in intellect and will and in every perfection" but, the agnostic would assert, these terms only underscore the inadequacy of our mental equipment to understand so vast, ephemeral and elusive a concept.

Although some agnostics do not believe in god and are therefore, by definition, also atheists, agnosticism is not a polite euphemism for atheism.
An agnostic may believe devoutly in god.
In fact, many mainstream believers in the West embrace an agnostic creed.
As noted above, for instance, Roman Catholic dogma about the nature of God contains many strictures of agnosticism.
An agnostic who believes in God despairs of ever fully comprehending what it is he believes in.
But some believing agnostics assert that that very absurdity strengthens their belief rather than weakens it.

In that sense being an agnostic is about choice.
You choose the position, where you simply do not take a stand on being neither a theist nor an atheist.
It is often put forth by atheists, that if you do not choose, then you are an atheist by default (absence of belief), but then a theist could justly argue, that you could as well be a theist, if you do not take a stand - you simply don't realize it.
Now here comes the tricky part.
If you choose not to take a stand on something, there is a time-dimension added (e.g.
I have not taken a stand on whether I will go training, but I may - may not tomorrow).
Now by choosing not to take a stand on the subject theism - atheism, I have not chosen not to be a theist, and yet mysteriously I am an atheist by default (abscence of belief).
It would be as obscene as to believe that by choosing not to take a stand, I would have chosen not to be an atheist, and yet mysteriously I am a theist by default.
If you choose not to take a stand you are either both by default or none by default, or you have the potential in time to be either.
I believe that subconsciously you can actually believe something, and yet it doesn't appear in your conscious mind, but if we keep to the conscious level, it does not make much sense to say, that you are both a theist and an atheist, so that leaves us with the point, that if you do choose not to take a stand on the subject of theism - atheism, then you are neither by default.
What is left then?
- agnosticism.

Agnosticism is the view that certain claims—especially religious and metaphysical claims—are unknown or unknowable.
Agnosticism can be defined in various ways, and is sometimes used to indicate skepticism.
In some senses, agnosticism is a stance about the nature of belief itself, rather than specific claims and beliefs.
As such, the term agnostic does not necessarily signal a particular view on religion or God, as some agnostics also identify as theists or atheists.

Thomas Henry Huxley, an English biologist, coined the word agnostic in 1860.
However, earlier thinkers and written works have promoted agnostic points of view.
They include Protagoras, a 5th-century B.C. Greek philosopher, and a creation story in the Rigveda, an ancient Hindu religious text.
Since Huxley coined the term, many other thinkers have written extensively about agnosticism, ranging from Albert Einstein to Pope Benedict XVI.

Recently suggested variations include:  Since Huxley first used the term, several writers have defended agnosticism as a philosophical viewpoint.
A number of earlier thinkers and writings have explored agnostic thought.
The Rigveda is an ancient Indian text, considered sacred in Hinduism, that dates from between 1700 and 1100 B.C. Agnostic ideas are explored in the Nasadiya Sukta, a creation hymn that describes the emergence of the universe.
The last lines of the text read:

Agnostic thought, in the form of skepticism, emerged as a formal philosophical position in ancient Greece.
Its proponents included Protagoras, Pyrrho, and Carneades.
Such thinkers rejected the idea that certainty was possible.