Freshly prepared americium metal has a white and silvery luster (more silvery than plutonium or neptunium) and at room temperatures it slowly tarnishes in dry air.
Alpha emission from Am-241 is approximately three times radium.
Gram quantities of Am-241 emit intense gamma rays which creates a serious exposure problem for anyone handeling the element.
This element can be produced in kilogram amounts and has some uses (mostly Am-241 since it is easier to produce relatively pure samples of this isotope).

Am-241 has been used as a portable gamma ray source for use in radiography.
The elemenht has also been employed to gauge glass thickness to help create flat glass.
Americium was first synthesized by Glenn T. Seaborg, Leon O. Morgan, Ralph A. James, and Albert Ghiorso in late 1944 at the wartime Metallurgical Laboratory at the University of Chicago (now known as Argonne National Laboratory).
The team created the isotope Am-241 by subjecting plutonium-239 to successive neutron capture reactions in a nuclear reactor.
This created Pu-240 and then Pu-241 which in turn decayed into Am-241 via beta decay.
18 radioisotopes of americium have been characterized, with the most stable being Am-243 with a half-life of 7370 years and Am-241 with a half-life of 432.2 years.
All of the remaining radioactive isotopes have half-lifes that are less than 51 hours, and the majority of these have half lifes that are less than 100 minutes.
This element also has 8 meta states, with the most stable being Am-241m (t 141 years).
The isotopes of americium range in atomic weight from 231.046 amu (Am-231) to 249.078 amu (Am-249).

Americium was first produced in late autumn 1944 by the group of Glenn T. Seaborg at the University of California, Berkeley.
Although it is the third element in the transuranic series, it was discovered fourth, after the heavier curium.
The discovery was kept secret and only released to the public in November 1945.
Most americium is produced by bombarding uranium or plutonium with alpha particles (helium ions) in nuclear reactors – one tonne of spent nuclear fuel contains about 100 grams of americium.

Americium is a relatively soft radioactive metal with silvery-white appearance.
Its most common isotopes are Am and Am.
In chemical compounds, they usually assume the oxidation state +3, especially in solutions.
Several other oxidation states is known, which range from +2 to +7 and can be identified via their characteristic optical absorption spectra.
The crystal lattice of solid americium and its compounds contains intrinsic defects, which are induced by self-irradiation with alpha particles and accumulate with time; this results in a drift of some material properties.

Whereas americium was likely produced in previous nuclear experiments, it was first intentionally synthesized, isolated and identified in late autumn 1944, at the University of California, Berkeley by Glenn T. Seaborg, Leon O. Morgan, Ralph A. James and Albert Ghiorso.
They used a 60-inch cyclotron on the University of California, Berkeley.
Americium was chemically identified at the Metallurgical Laboratory (now Argonne National Laboratory) of the University of Chicago.
After lighter neptunium, plutonium and heavier curium, americium was the fourth transuranium element to be discovered.
In the periodic table (which was by then already restructured by Seaborg to its present layout, containing the actinide row), americium is located right below its twin lanthanide element europium; it was thus by analogy named after another continent, America: "The name americium (after the Americas) and the symbol Am are suggested for the element on the basis of its position as the sixth member of the actinide rare-earth series, analogous to europium, Eu, of the lanthanide series."

The new element was isolated from its oxides in a complex, multi-step process.
First plutonium (Pu) nitrate solution was coated on a platinum foil of about 0.5 cm² area, the solution was evaporated and the residue was converted into plutonium dioxide (PuO) by annealing.
After cyclotron irradiation, the coating was dissolved with nitric acid and then precipitated as the hydroxide using concentrated aqueous ammonia solution.
The residue was dissolved in perchloric acid.
Further separation was carried out with ion exchange yielding a certain isotope of curium.
The separation of curium and americium was so painstaking that those elements were initially called by the Berkley group as pandemonium (from Greek for all demons or hell) and delirium (from Latin for madness).

Initial experiments yielded four americium isotopes: Am, Am, Am and Am.
Americium-241 was directly obtained from plutonium upon absorption of a neutron.
It decays by emission of a α-particle to Np; the half-life of this decay was first determined as 510 ± 20 years but then corrected to 432.2 years.
The second isotope Am was produced upon neutron bombardment of the already created Am.
Upon rapid β-decay, Am converts into the previously discovered isotope of curium Cm.
The half-life of this decay was initially determined at 17 hours, and it was rather close to the presently accepted value of 16.02 h. The discovery of americium, as well as curium, in 1944 was closely related to the Manhattan Project, the results were confidential and declassified only in 1945.
Seaborg leaked the synthesis of the elements 95 and 96 on the U.S. radio show for children, the Quiz Kids, five days before the official presentation at an American Chemical Society meeting on November 11, 1945, when one of the listeners asked whether any new transuranium element beside plutonium and neptunium had been discovered during the war.
The discovery of americium (Am and Am), their production and compounds were later patented listing only Seaborg as the inventor.
The initial americium samples weighed a few micrograms; they were barely visible and were identified by their radioactivity.
The first substantial amounts of metallic americium weighing 40–200 micrograms were prepared only in 1951 by reduction of americium(III) fluoride with barium metal in high vacuum at 1100 °C.

The longest-lived and most common isotopes of americium, Am and Am, have half-lives of 432.2 and 7,370 years, respectively.
Therefore, all primordial americium, that is americium present on the Earth during its formation, should have decayed by now.
On Earth, americium is mostly concentrated in certain areas used for the atmospheric nuclear weapons tests, which were conducted between 1945 and 1980, as well as at the sites of nuclear incidents, such as Chernobyl disaster and Three Mile Island accident.
So the analysis of the debris at the testing site of the first U.S. hydrogen bomb, Ivy Mike, (1 November 1952, Enewetak Atoll), revealed high concentrations of various actinides, including americium.
For reasons of military secrecy, this result was published only in 1956.
Elevated levels of americium were also detected at the crash cite of the US B-52 bomber, which carried four hydrogen bombs, in 1968 in Greenland.

In other regions, the average radioactivity due to residual americium is only about 0.01 picocuries.
Atmospheric americium compounds are poorly soluble in common solvents and mostly adhere to soil particles.
Soil analysis revealed about 1,900 higher concentration of americium at the sandy soil particles than in water present in the soil pores, and even higher ratio was measured in loam soils.

Americium is mostly produced artificially, in small quantities for research purposes.
A tonne of spent nuclear fuel contains about 100 grams of various americium isotopes, mostly Am and Am.
Their prolonged radioactivity is undesirable for the disposal, and therefore americium, together with other long-lived actinides, have to be neutralized.
The associated procedure may involve several steps, where americium is first separated and then converted by neutron bombardment in special reactors to short-lived nuclides.
This procedure is well known as nuclear transmutation, but it is still being developed for americium.

Americium has been produced in small quantities in nuclear reactors for decades, and kilograms of its Am and Am isotopes have been accumulated by now.
Nevertheless, since it was first offered for sale in 1962, its price, about 1,500 USD per gram of Am, remains almost unchanged owing to the very complex separation procedure.
The heavier isotope Am is produced in much smaller amounts; it is thus more difficult to separate that results in a higher cost of the order 160 USD/mg.

The thus obtained Am can be used for generating heavier americium isotopes by further neutron capture in a nuclear reactor.
In a light water reactor (LWR), 79% of Am converts to Am and 10% to its nuclear isomer (a "metastable" state marked by letter m) Am: Americium-242 has a half-life of only 16 hours that makes extremely inefficient its further up-conversion to Am.
The latter isotope is produced instead in a process where Pu captures four neutrons under strong neutron fluence: Most synthesis routines yield a mixture of different actinide isotopes, in oxide form, from which a certain isotope of americium needs to be separated.
An example procedure could be to dissolve spent reactor fuel (e.g. MOX fuel) in nitric acid, and remove the bulk of the uranium and plutonium using a PUREX (Plutonium – URanium EXtraction) type extraction with tributyl phosphate in a hydrocarbon.
The lanthanides and the remaining actinides are then separated from the aqueous residue (raffinate) by a diamide-based extraction to give, after stripping, a mixture of trivalent actinides and lanthanides.
A certain americium compound is then selectively extracted using multi-step chromatographic and centrifugation techniques with an appropriate reagent.
A large amount of work has been done on the solvent extraction of americium.
For example, a recent EU funded project codenamed "EUROPART" studied triazines and other compounds as potential extraction agents.
Bis-triazinyl bipyridine complex has been recently proposed as such reagent which is highly selective to americium (and curium).
Separation of americium from a very similar curium can also be achieved by treating a slurry of their hydroxides in aqueous sodium bicarbonate with ozone at elevated temperature.
Both Am and Cm are mostly present in solutions in the +3 valence state; whereas curium remains unchanged, americium oxidizes to soluble Am(IV) complexes which can be washed away.

Metallic americium is obtained by reduction of its compounds.
First, americium(III) fluoride was used for this purpose.
The reaction was conducted in the environment free from water and oxygen, in the apparatus made of tantalum and tungsten, using elemental barium as reducing agents.
Another possibility is the reduction of americium dioxide by lanthanum or thorium metals:

In the periodic table, americium is located right to the actinide plutonium, left to the actinide curium and below the lanthanide europium with which it shares many similarities in physical and chemical properties.
Americium is a highly radioactive element.
When freshly prepared, it has a silvery-white metallic lustre, but then slowly tarnishes in air.
With the density of 12 g/cm, americium is lighter than both curium (13.52 g/cm) and plutonium (19.8 g/cm) but is heavier than europium (5.264 g/cm mostly because of its higher atomic mass.
Americium is relatively soft and easily deformable and has a significantly lower bulk modulus than Th, Pa, U, Np and Pu.
Its melting point of 1173 °C is significantly higher than that of plutonium (639 °C) and europium (826 °C), but lower than for curium (1340 °C).

At ambient conditions, americium is present in its most stable α form which has a hexagonal symmetry, space group P6/mmc, lattice parameters a = 346.8 pm and c = 1124 pm, and four formula units per unit cell.
The crystal consists of a double-hexagonal close packing with the layer sequence ABAC and so is isotypic with α-lanthanum and several actinides such as α-curium.
The crystal structure of americium changes with pressure and temperature.
When compressed at room temperature to 5 GPa, α-Am transforms to the beta modification, which has a face-centered cubic (fcc) symmetry, space group Fmm and the lattice constant a = 489 pm.
This fcc structure is equivalent to the closest packing with the sequence ABC.
Upon further compression to 23 GPa, americium transforms to an orthorhombic γ-Am structure similar to that of α-uranium.
There are no further transitions observed up to 52 GPa, except for an appearance of a monoclinic phase at pressures between 10 and 15 GPa.
There is no consistency on the status of this phase in the literature, which also sometimes lists the α, β and γ phases as I, II and III.
The β-γ transition is accompanied by a 6% decrease in the crystal volume; although theory also predicts a significant volume change for the α-β transition, it is not observed experimentally.
The pressure of the α-β transition decreases with increasing temperature, and when α-americium is heated at ambient pressure, at 770 °C it changes into an fcc phase which is different from β-Am, and at 1075 °C it converts to a body-centered cubic structure.
The pressure-temperature phase diagram of americium is thus rather similar to those of lanthanum, praseodymium and neodymium.

Self-damage of the crystal lattice due to alpha-particle irradiation is intrinsic to americium, as well as many other actinides.
It is especially noticeable at low temperatures, where the mobility of the produced lattice defects is relatively low, by broadening of X-ray diffraction peaks.
This effect makes somewhat uncertain the temperature of americium and some of its properties, such as electrical resistivity.
So for americium-241, the resistivity at 4.2 K increases with time from about 2 µOhm·cm to 10 µOhm·cm after 40 hours, and saturates at about 16 µOhm·cm after 140 hours.
This effect is less pronounced at room temperature, due to annihilation of radiation defects; also heating to room temperature the sample which was kept for hours at low temperatures restores its resistivity.
In fresh samples, the resistivity gradually increases with temperature from about 2 µOhm·cm at liquid helium to 69 µOhm·cm at room temperature; this behavior is similar to that of neptunium, uranium, thorium and protactinium, but is different from plutonium and curium which show a rapid rise up to 60 K followed by saturation.
The room temperature value for americium is lower than that of neptunium, plutonium and curium, but higher than for uranium, thorium and protactinium.

Americium is paramagnetic in the wide temperature range between liquid helium and room temperature and above.
This behavior is markedly different from that of its neighbor curium which exhibit antiferromagnetic transition at 52 K. The thermal expansion coefficient of americium is slightly anisotropic and amounts to (7.5 ± 0.2)/°C along the shorter a axis and (6.2 ± 0.4)/°C for the longer c hexagonal axis.
The enthalpy of dissolution of americium metal in hydrochloric acid at standard conditions is −620.6 ± 1.3 kJ/mol, from which the standard enthalpy change of formation (ΔH°) of aqueous Am ion is −621.2 ± 2.0 kJ/mol.
The standard potential Am/Am is 2.08 ± 0.01 V.

Americium readily reacts with oxygen and dissolves well in acids.
The most common oxidation state for americium is +3, in which americium compounds are rather stable against oxidation and reduction.
In this sense, americium is chemically similar to most lanthanides and actinides.
The trivalent americium forms insoluble fluoride, oxalate, iodate, hydroxide, phosphate and other salts.
Other oxidation states have been observed between +2 and +7, which is the widest range among the actinide elements.
Their color in aqueous solutions varies as follows: Am (colorless to yellow-reddish), Am (yellow-reddish), AmO; (yellow), AmO (brown) and AmO (dark green).
All oxidation states have their characteristic optical absorption spectra, with a few sharp peaks in the visible and mid-infrared regions, and the position and intensity of these peaks can be converted into the concentrations of the corresponding oxidation states.
For example, Am(III) has two sharp peaks at 504 and 811 nm, Am(V) at 514 and 715 nm, and Am(VI) at 666 and 992 nm.

These high oxidation states Am(IV), Am(V) and Am(VI) can be prepared from Am(III) by oxidation with ammonium in dilute nitric acid, with silver(I) oxide in perchloric acid, or with ozone or sodium in sodium solutions.
The pentavalent oxidation state of americium was first observed in 1951.
It is present in aqueous solution in the form of AmO ions (acidic) or AmO ions (alkaline) which are however unstable and subject to several rapid disproportionation reactions:  Two americium oxides are known, with the oxidation states +3 (AmO) and +4 (AmO).
Americium(III) oxide is a red-brown solid with a melting point of 2205 °C.
Americium(IV) oxide is the main form of solid americium which is used in nearly all its applications.
As most other actinide dioxides, it is a black solid with a cubic (fluorite) crystal structure.

The oxalate of americium(III), vacuum dried at room temperature, has the chemical formula Am(CO)·7HO.
Upon heating in vacuum, it loses water at 240 °C and starts decomposing into AmO at 300 °C, the decomposition completes at about 470 °C.
The initial oxalate dissolves in nitric acid with the maximum solubility of 0.25 g/L.
Halides of americium are known for the oxidation states +2, +3 and +4, where the +3 is most stable, especially in solutions.

Reduction of Am(III) compounds with sodium amalgam yields Am(II) salts – the black halides AmCl, AmBr and AmI.
They are very sensitive to oxygen and oxidize in water, releasing hydrogen and converting to Am(III) state.
The lattice constants for the orthorhombic AmCl are a = 896.3 ± 0.8 pm, b = 757.3 ± 0.8 pm and c = 453.2 ± 0.6 pm; and for the tetragonal AmBr are a = 1159.2 ± 0.4 and c = 712.1 ± 0.3 pm.
They can also be prepared by reacting metallic americium with an appropriate mercury halide HgX, where X = Cl, Br or I:Americium(III) fluoride (AmF) is poorly soluble and precipitates upon reaction of Am and fluoride ions in weak acidic solutions: The tetravalent americium(IV) fluoride]] (AmF) is obtained by reacting solid americium(III) fluoride with molecular fluorine: Another known form of solid tetravalent americium chloride is KAmF.
Tetravalent americium has also been observed in the aqueous phase.
For this purpose, black Am(OH) was dissolved in 15-M NHF with the americium concentration of 0.01 M. The resulting reddish solution had a characteristic optical absorption spectrum which is similar to that of AmF but differed from other oxidation states of americium.
Heating the Am(IV) solution to 90 °C did not result in its disproportionation or reduction, however a slow reduction was observed to Am(III) and assigned to self-irradiation of americium by alpha particles.

Most americium(III) halides form hexagonal crystals with slight variation of the color and exact structure between the halogens.
So, chloride (AmCl) is reddish and has a structure isotypic to uranium(III) chloride (space group P6/m) and the melting point of 715 °C.
The fluoride is isotypic to LaF (space group P6/mmc) and the iodide to BiI (space group R).
The bromide is an exception with the orthorhombic PuBr-type structure and space group Cmcm.
Crystals of americium hexahydrate (AmCl·6HO) can be prepared by dissolving americium dioxide in hydrochloric acid and evaporating the liquid.
Those crystals are hygroscopic and have yellow-reddish color and a monoclinic crystal structure.

Oxyhalides of americium in the form AmOX, AmOX, AmOX and AmOX can be obtained by reacting the corresponding americium halide with oxygen or SbO, and AmOCl can also be produced by vapor phase hydrolysis:The known chalcogenides of americium include the sulfide AmS, selenides AmSe and AmSe, and tellurides AmTe and AmTe.
The pnictides of americium (Am) of the AmX type are known for the elements phosphorus, arsenic antimony and bismuth.
They crystallize in the rock-salt lattice.
Americium monosilicide (AmSi) and "disilicide" (nominally AmSi with: 1.87 < x < 2.0) were obtained by reduction of americium(III) fluoride with elementary silicon in vacuum at 1050 °C (AmSi) and 1150-1200 °C (AmSi).
AmSi is a black solid isomorphic with LaSi, it has an orthorhombic crystal symmetry.
AmSi has a bright silvery lustre and a tetragonal crystal lattice (space group I4/amd), it is isomorphic with PuSi and ThSi.
Borides of americium include AmB and AmB.
The tetraboride can be obtained by heating an oxide or halide of americium with magnesium diboride in vacuum or inert atmosphere.

Formation of the complexes of the type Am(n-CH-BTP), where BTP stands for 2,6-di(1,2,4-triazin-3-yl)pyridine, in solutions containing n-CH-BTP and Am ions has been confirmed by EXAFS.
Some of these BTP-type complexes selectively interact with americium and therefore are useful in its selective separation from lanthanides and another actinides.
Americium has no known biological function.
It has been proposed to use bacteria for removal of americium and other heavy metals from rivers and streams.
Thus, Enterobacteriaceae of the genus Citrobacter precipitate americium ions from aqueous solutions, binding them into a metal-phosphate complex at their cell walls.
Several studies have been reported on the biosorption and bioaccumulation of americium by bacteria and fungi.
The isotope Am (half-life 141 years) has the largest cross sections for absorption of thermal neutrons (5,700 barns), that results in a small critical mass for a sustained nuclear chain reaction.
The critical mass for a bare Am sphere is about 9–14 kg (the uncertainty results from insufficient knowledge of its material properties).
It can be lowered to 3–5 kg with a metal reflector and should become even smaller with a water reflector.
Such small critical mass is favorable for portable nuclear weapons, but those based on Am are not known yet, probably because of its scarcity and high price.
The critical masses of two other readily available isotopes, Am and Am, are relatively high – 57.6 to 75.6 kg for Am and 209 kg for Am.
Scarcity and high price yet hinder application of americium as a nuclear fuel in nuclear reactors.

About 16 isotopes and 11 nuclear isomers are known for americium.
There are two long-lived alpha-emitters, Am and Am with half-lives of 432.2 and 7,370 years, respectively, and the nuclear isomer Am has a long half-life of 141 years.
The half-lives of other isotopes and isomers range from 0.64 microseconds for Am to 50.8 hours for Am.
As with most other actinides, the isotopes of americium with odd number of neutrons have relatively high rate of nuclear fission and low critical mass.

The radiation passes through an ionization chamber, an air-filled space between two electrodes, and permits a small, constant current between the electrodes.
Any smoke that enters the chamber absorbs the alpha particles, which reduces the ionization and interrupts this current, setting off the alarm.
Compared to the alternative optical sensor, the ionization-type smoke detector is cheaper and can detect particles which are too small to induce significant light scattering; however, it is more prone to false (nuisance) alarms.
As Am has a significantly longer half-life than Pu (432.2 years vs. 87 years), it has been proposed as an active element of radioisotope thermoelectric generators, for example in spacecraft.
Although americium produces less heat and electricity – the power yield is 114.7 mW/g for Am and 6.31 mW/g for Am (cf. 390 mW/g for Pu) – and its radiation poses more threat to humans owing to neutron emission, the European Space Agency is planning to use americium for its space probes.

Another proposed space-related application of americium is a fuel for space ships with nuclear propulsion.
It relies on the very high rate of nuclear fission rate of Am, which can be maintained even in a micrometer-thick foil.
Small thickness avoids the problem of self-absorption of emitted radiation.
This problem is pertinent to uranium or plutonium rods, in which only surface layers provide alpha-particles.

Another proposal which utilizes the high nuclear fission rate of Am is a nuclear battery.
Its design relies not on the energy of the emitted by americium alpha particles, but on their charge, i.e. the americium acts as the self-sustaining "cathode".
A single 3.2 kg Am charge of such battery could provide about 140 kW of power over a period of 80 days.
The oxide of Am pressed with beryllium is an efficient neutron source.
Here americium acts as the alpha source, and beryllium produces neutrons owing to its large cross-section for the (α,n) nuclear reaction:  The most widespread use of AmBe neutron sources a neutron probe – a device used to measure the quantity of water present in soil, as well as moisture/density for quality control in highway construction.
Am neutron sources are also used in well logging applications, as well as in neutron radiography, tomography and other radiochemical investigations.
Americium is a starting material for the production of other transuranic elements and transactinides – for example, 82.7% of Am decays to Cm and 17.3% to Pu.
In the nuclear reactor, Am is also up-converted by neutron capture to Am and Am, which transforms by β-decay to Cm: Irradiation of Am by C or Ne ions yields the isotopes Es (einsteinium) or Db (dubnium), respectively.
Furthermore, the element berkelium (Bk isotope) had been first intentionally produced and identified by bombarding Am with alpha particles, in 1949, by the same Berkeley group, using the same 60-inch cyclotron.
Similarly, nobelium was produced at Dubna, Russia, in 1965 in several reactions, one of which included irradiation of Am with N ions.
Besides, one of the synthesis reactions for lawrencium, discovered by scientists at Berkeley and Dubna, included bombardment of Am with O. Americium-241 has been used as a portable source of both gamma rays and alpha particles for a number of medical and industrial uses.
The 60-keV gamma ray emissions from Am in such sources can be used for indirect analysis of materials in radiography and X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy, as well as for quality control in fixed nuclear density gauges and nuclear densometers.

If consumed, americium is excreted within a few days and only 0.05% is absorbed in the blood.
From there, roughly 45% of it goes to the liver and 45% to the bones and the remaining 10% is excreted.
The uptake to the liver depends on the individual and increases with age.
In the bones, americium is first deposited over cortical and trabecular surfaces and slowly redistributes over the bone with time.
The biological half-life of americium isotope Am is 50 years in the bones and 20 years in the liver, whereas in the gonads (testicles and ovaries) it remains permanently; in all these organs, americium promotes formation of cancer cells as a result of its radioactivity.

Americium often enters landfills from discarded smoke detectors.
The rules associated with the disposal of smoke detectors are very relaxed in most municipalities.
For instance in the UK it is permissible to dispose of an americium containing smoke detector by placing it in the dustbin with normal household rubbish, but each filled dustbin is limited to contain not more than one smoke detector.
In France a truck transporting 900 smoke detectors had been reported to have caught fire, it is claimed that this led to a release of americium into the environment.
In the U.S., the "Radioactive Boy Scout" David Hahn was able to buy and steal thousands of smoke detectors at remainder prices and concentrate the americium from them.
There have been cases of humans being contaminated with americium, the worst case being that of Harold McCluskey, who at the age of 64 was exposed to 500 times the occupational standard for americium-241 as a result of an explosion in his lab.
McCluskey died at the age of 75, not as a result of exposure, but of a heart disease which he had before the accident.