The first claimed discovery occurred in 1931 at the Alabama Polytechnic Institute (now Auburn University) by Fred Allison and associates; the discoverers claimed they had found element 85 and, therefore, chose a name for the element, which they decided to be "alabamine," and a symbol, Ab, which were used for a few years.
In 1934, however, H. G. MacPherson of University of California disproved the effectiveness of Allison's device and the validity of this false discovery.
This erroneous discovery was followed by another "discovery," claimed in 1937 the chemist Rajendralal De.
Working in Dhaka, British India (now Bangladesh), he chose the name selected include the name "dakin," which he explained to be after Dacia, a Romanian province.
The thought the element to be a member of "thorium series," but no such series is known today.
More than that, during the next "discovery" of the element it was also recognized a member of "thorium series."
This discovery was made by the Swiss chemist Walter Minder in 1940, and he chose the name "helvetium" (from Helvetia, "Switzerland").
This has not received wide recognition, and he re-announced the discovery in 1942, now with English scientist Alice Leigh-Smith, having chosen the name "anglohelvetium" (from Anglia, "England," and Helvetia, "Switzerland").

The first correctly assigned claim took its place in 1940, and was done by Dale R. Corson, Kenneth Ross MacKenzie, and Emilio Segrè at the same University of California, Berkeley.
Instead of searching for the element in the nature, the scientists have actually created it by bombarding bismuth with alpha particles.
The name "astatine" comes from the Greek word αστατος astatos, meaning "unstable," to imply the created isotope's unstability towards radioactive decay; later, all isotopes of the element were shown to be unstable.
Three years later, actual astatine was found as product of the natural decay processes by the two scientists Berta Karlik and Traude Bernert.
These processes are called decay chains.
Since then, astatine was found in three out of four.

There are 32 known isotopes of astatine, with range atomic mass of 191 and 193—232.
The most stable of them is astatine-210, that has a half-life of 8.1 hours.
This isotope's primary decay mode is beta minus decay to a relatively (compared to astatine isotopes) long-lived alpha emitter polonium-210.
In total, only five isotopes have half-lives exceeding one hour, all having mass numbers between 207 and 211.
The least stable ground state isotope is lightest one known, astatine-213, with a half-life of 125 ns and alpha decays to the extremely long-lived (and stable for everyday use) bismuth-209.

In nature, four astatine isotopes are present: astatine-215, -217, -218, and -219; they all decay rapidly, but are recreated rapidly as well.
The first and the last are present in actinium series, the second is found in neptunium series, and the last is found in uranium series.
These four isotopes are very all short-lived and primarily alpha emitters.

Astatine has 23 nuclear isomers (one isotope does not necessarily correspond to one isomer).
The most stable of them is astatine-202m1, which has a half-life of about 3 minutes; this is longer than those of all ground state, except for isotopes with mass numbers 203—211 and 220.
The least stable one is astatine-214m1; its half-life of 265 ns is shorter than those of all ground state, except for the mentioned astatine-213.