The Siboney were the first to inhabit the islands of Antigua and Barbuda in 2400 BC, but Arawak and Carib Indians populated the islands when Columbus landed on his second voyage in 1493.
Early settlements by the Spanish and French were succeeded by the English who formed a colony in 1667.
Slavery, established to run the sugar plantations on Antigua, was abolished in 1834.

As with most nation in the Commonwealth, the head of state is Queen Elizabeth II, who is represented in Antigua and Barbuda by a governor general.
Executive power is in the hands of the prime minister, who is also the head of government.
The prime minister is usually the leader of the winning party of the elections for the House of Representatives (17 members), held every five year.
The other chamber of the parliament, the Senate, has 17 members which are appointed by the governor general.
Main article: Parishes and dependencies of Antigua and Barbuda

The country consists of a number of islands, of which the Antigua is the largest one, and the most populated.
Barbuda, just north of Antigua is the other main island.
The islands have a warm, tropical climate, with fairly constant temperatures year round.

Tourism continues to dominate the economy, accounting for more than half of GDP.
Weak tourist arrival numbers since early 2000 have slowed the economy, however, and pressed the government into a tight fiscal corner.
The dual-island nation's agricultural production is focused on the domestic market and constrained by a limited water supply and a labor shortage stemming from the lure of higher wages in tourism and construction work.
Manufacturing comprises enclave-type assembly for export with major products being bedding, handicrafts, and electronic components.
Prospects for economic growth in the medium term will continue to depend on income growth in the industrialized world, especially in the US, which accounts for about one-third of all tourist arrivals.
Main article: Demographics of Antigua and Barbuda