Although he originally wanted to become a mathematician when he was young, he ended up following in the footsteps of his father and grandfather and studied architecture instead.
He studied under Heinrich Tessenow at the Institute of Technology in Berlin, eventually becoming Tessenow's assistant.
After completing his studies in 1931, he married Margarete Weber.
Later that year he was persuaded by some of his students to attend a Nazi Party rally, where he found himself mesmerized by the words of Adolf Hitler.
Within weeks he was a member of the Party.

His first commission as a Party member came in 1933 when Joseph Goebbels asked him to renovate the Propaganda Ministry.
Goebbels was impressed with his work and recommended him to Hitler, who assigned him to help Paul Troost renovate the Chancellery in Berlin.
Speer's most notable work on this assignment was the addition of the famous balcony.

The grounds were based on ancient Doric architecture of the Pergamum Altar in Turkey, but magnified to an enormous scale, capable of holding two hundred and forty thousand people.
At the 1934 Party rally on the parade grounds, Speer surrounded the site with one hundred and fifty anti-aircraft searchlights.
This created the effect of a "cathedral of light," as it was called by British Ambassador Sir Neville Henderson.

Nuremberg was also to be the site of many more official Nazi buildings, most of which were never built; for example, the German Stadium would have held another four hundred thousand spectators as the site of the Aryan Games, a proposed replacement for the Olympic Games.
While planning these buildings, Speer invented the theory of "ruin value."
According to this theory, enthusiastically supported by Hitler, all new buildings would be constructed in such a way that they would leave aesthetically pleasing ruins thousands of years in the future.
Such ruins would be a testament to the greatness of the Third Reich, just as ancient Greek or Roman ruins were symbols of the greatness of their civilizations.

The first step in these plans was the Olympic Stadium for the 1936 Summer Olympics.
Speer also designed a new Chancellery, which included a vast hall designed to be twice as long as the Hall of Mirrors in the Palace of Versailles.
Hitler wanted him to build a third, even larger Chancellery, although it was never begun.
The second Chancellery was destroyed by the Soviet army in 1945.

Almost none of the other buildings planned for Berlin were ever built.
Berlin was to be reorganized along a central three-mile long avenue.
At the north end, Speer planned to build an enormous domed building, based on St. Peter's Basilica in Rome.
The dome of the building would have been impractically large; it would be over seven hundred feet high and eight hundred feet in diamter, sixteen times larger than the dome of St. Peter's.
At the southern end of the avenue would be an arch based on the Arc de Triomphe in Paris, but again, much larger; it would be almost four hundred feet high, and the Arc de Triomphe would have been able to fit inside its opening.
The outbreak of World War II in 1939 led to the abandonment of these plans.

He worked diligently to increase war production, often through the use of slave labour, even though it became more and more obvious that Germany was facing imminent defeat.
However, he also became one of the few Nazi leaders to stand up to Hitler and his increasingly maniacal demands.
Speer refused to carry out Hitler's scorched earth policy, and even planned an assassination attempt in 1945.
Despite this, Hitler continued to consider Speer a friend, and Speer was one of the last people he spoke to before he committed suicide.

Albert Speer (March 19, 1905 - September 1, 1981), sometimes called 'the first architect of the Third Reich', was Hitler's chief architect in Nazi Germany and became in 1942 minister of armament in Hitler's cabinet.
After the war he was tried at Nuremberg where he expressed repentance and was convicted to twenty years imprisonment.
After his release, he became a successful author, writing a number of semi-biographical works.
Although, he originally wanted to become a mathematician when he was young, he ended up following in the footsteps of his father and grandfather and studied architecture instead.
He studied under Heinrich Tessenow at the Institute of Technology in Berlin, eventually becoming Tessenow's assistant.
After completing his studies in 1931, he married Margarete Weber.
Later that year he was persuaded by some of his students to attend a Nazi Party rally, where he found himself mesmerized by the words of Adolf Hitler.
Within weeks he was a member of the Party.

His first commission as a Party member came in 1933 when Joseph Goebbels asked him to renovate the Propaganda Ministry.
Goebbels was impressed with his work and recommended him to Hitler, who assigned him to help Paul Troost renovate the Chancellery in Berlin.
Speer's most notable work on this assignment was the addition of the famous balcony.
Troost died in 1934, and Speer was chosen to replace him as the Party's chief architect.
One of his first commissions after his promotion was perhaps the most familiar of his designs: the Zeppelintribune, the Nuremberg parade grounds seen in Leni Riefenstahl's propaganda masterpiece, Triumph of the Will.
In his autobiography, Speer claimed that, upon seeing the original design, he made a derogatory remark to the effect that the parade ground would resemble a "rifle club" meet.
He was then challenged to create a new design.

The grounds were based on ancient Doric architecture of the Pergamum Altar in Turkey, but magnified to an enormous scale, capable of holding two hundred and forty thousand people.
At the 1934 Party rally on the parade grounds, Speer surrounded the site with one hundred and fifty anti-aircraft searchlights.
This created the effect of a "cathedral of light," as it was called by British Ambassador Sir Neville Henderson.

Nuremberg was also to be the site of many more official Nazi buildings, most of which were never built; for example, the German Stadium would have held another four hundred thousand spectators as the site of the Aryan Games, a proposed replacement for the Olympic Games.
While planning these buildings, Speer invented the theory of "ruin value."
According to this theory, enthusiastically supported by Hitler, all new buildings would be constructed in such a way that they would leave aesthetically pleasing ruins thousands of years in the future.
Such ruins would be a testament to the greatness of the Third Reich, just as ancient Greek or Roman ruins were symbols of the greatness of their civilizations.

Speer was also directed to make plans to rebuild Berlin, which was to become the capital of a supra-German state -- Welthauptstadt Germania.
The first step in these plans was the Olympic Stadium for the 1936 Summer Olympics, designed by Werner March.
Speer also designed the new Reichs Chancellery, which included a vast hall designed to be twice as long as the Hall of Mirrors in the Palace of Versailles.
Hitler wanted him to build a third, even larger Chancellery, although it was never begun.
The second Chancellery was destroyed by the Soviet army in 1945.

Almost none of the other buildings planned for Berlin were ever built.
Berlin was to be reorganized along a central three-mile long avenue.
At the north end, Speer planned to build an enormous domed building, based on St. Peter's Basilica in Rome.
The dome of the building would have been impractically large; it would be over seven hundred feet high and eight hundred feet in diameter, sixteen times larger than the dome of St. Peter's.
At the southern end of the avenue would be an arch based on the Arc de Triomphe in Paris, but again, much larger; it would be almost four hundred feet high, and the Arc de Triomphe would have been able to fit inside its opening.
The outbreak of World War II in 1939 led to the abandonment of these plans.
During his involvement in the rebuilding of Berlin, he was also responsible for the forced deportation of Jews, evicting them from their houses to make room for his grand plans and for re-housing German citizens affected by this work.
Therefore, his claims of being unaware of the Holocaust are highly questionable, particularly as he was listed as being present at the 1943 Posen Conference.

According to interviews after his imprisonment, Speer adopted a "see no evil" attitude towards the Nazi atrocities.
For example, he admitted he was aware of Auschwitz and large number of deaths taking place there.
He then purposely avoided visiting the camp or trying to get more information on what was taking place.
Hitler was always a strong supporter of Speer, whose designs were considered expressions of National Socialist principles.
After Minister of Armaments and War Production Fritz Todt was killed in an airplane crash in 1942, Hitler appointed Speer as Todt's successor.

Speer worked diligently to increase war production, often through the use of slave labour, even though it became more and more obvious that Germany was facing imminent defeat.
He tried unsuccessfully to put German economy on war footing, but party politics and the inner circle of influence around Hitler prevented him, directly influencing the final outcome of the war.
In his autobiography, he claims that he had no direct involvement or knowledge of the Holocaust, although he faults himself for blinding himself to its existence.
He certainly was aware of harsh conditions for the slave labour.

At the Nuremberg trials after the war Speer was one of the few officials to express remorse and plead guilty; he was sentenced to 20 years' imprisonment in Spandau Prison, West Berlin, largely for his use of slave labour.
His release from prison in 1966 was a world-wide media event.
He published several semi-autobiographical books until his death in London on September 1, 1981 - exactly 42 years after World War II began.
His books such as Inside the Third Reich provided a unique and personal look into the personalities of the Nazi era.
However, many critics believe that his books understate his role in the atrocities of the era.

Speer's most notable work on this assignment was the addition of the famous balcony from which Hitler often presented himself to crowds that assembled below.
Speer subsequently became a prominent member of Hitler's inner circle and a very close friends to him, winning a special place with Hitler that was unique amongst the Nazi leadership.

After Minister of Armaments and War Production Fritz Todt was killed in an airplane crash in 1942, Hitler appointed Speer as Todt's successor in all of his posts.

Faced with this new responsibility, Speer tried to put the German economy on a war footing comparable to that of the Allied nations, but found himself incessantly hindered by party politics and lack of cooperation amongst the Nazi hierarchy.
Nevertheless, by slowly centralizing almost all industry control and cutting through the dense Nazi bureaucracy, he succeeded in multiplying war production four times over the course of the next 2 and a half years, with it actually reaching its peak in 1944 during the height of the Allied strategic bombing campaign.
Another big hurdle in his way was the Nazi policy that excluded women from factory work, which was a serious hindrance in war production and a problem unknown to Germany's rival nations, who all made full use of the female workforce.
To fill this gap, Speer made heavy use of foreign labor, with a considerable amount of it forced labor.

Considered by Claus von Stauffenberg, the organizer of an unsuccessful conspiracy against Hitler, Speer was a complete opposite of the raging Hitler, grotesque Göring and the perverse Himmler, and thus his name was found on the list of members of a post-Hitler government envisioned by the July 20 plotters, however, the list had an annotation "if possible" by his name, a note that Speer credits with saving his life from the extensive purges that followed.
According to his own accounts, Speer even planned to assassinate Hitler in 1945 by releasing poison gas into his the air intake vent on his bunker, but backed down for a number of reasons.
Independent evidence for this is sparse.
Some credit his revelation of this plan at the Nuremberg trials as being pivotal sparing him the death sentence, which the Soviet's were pushing for.

Oblivious to the assassination plot, Hitler continued to consider Speer trustworthy.
This trust waned near the conclusion of the war as Speer, with considerable risk to his own life, campaigned clandestinely to prevent the implementation of Hitler's scorched earth policy on both German soil and occupied territories, and in association with General Gotthard Heinrici, ordered most troops fighting in the east to disobey Hitler's orders, retreat to the American-held lines and surrender there instead of making a suicidal effort to unblock Berlin from the Soviets.
Speer even confessed to Hitler a few days before his suicide that he has been disobeying, and indeed actively hindering, his "scorched-earth" policy, which, according to Speer's autobiography, brought Hitler to tears.
Hitler's newfound disfavor for Speer in the remaining months of the war is made evident by his exclusion of Speer from the new cabinet he outlined in his political testament, where Speer was to be succeeded by his subordinate, Karl-Otto Saur.

His design, using huge flags, was highly effective.
While Hermann Goering took credit for the design, Speer then became the obvious candidate to design the Nuremberg rally in 1933, bringing him into contact with Hitler for the first time.
Speer was sent to Munich to get Hitler's approval for the design.
According to Speer in Inside the Third Reich, Hitler was busy cleaning a pistol, which he laid aside to cast a brief, interested look at the plans, and approved them without ever even looking at the young architect.

Speer's next major assignment was as liaison to the Berlin building trades for Paul Troost's renovation of the Chancellery in Berlin.
Hitler, as Chancellor, remained in residence in the building, and each day he would emerge to be briefed by Speer on the progress of the renovations, before the dictator talked with a number of the workmen.
After one of these briefings, Hitler invited Speer to lunch, and before long, Speer received a stream of invitations to Hitler's residences, or to travel with Hitler on journeys.
The two men found much in common: Hitler prized fellow artists like Speer with whom he felt a certain kinship, especially as Hitler himself had previously entertained architectural ambitions.
The young, ambitious architect was dazzled at becoming part of the inner circle, which guaranteed him a flood of commissions from the government and the very highest ranks of the Party.

In January 1938, Hitler asked Speer to build a new Reich Chancellery, stating that he needed it for urgent foreign policy reasons not later than his next New Year's reception for diplomats on January 10, 1939.
This was a huge undertaking, especially since the existing Chancellery was in full operation.
After consultation with his assistants, Speer agreed.
It was not until April that the site could be cleared, and Speer was successful in building the structure, which included a vast hall designed to be twice as long as the Hall of Mirrors in the Palace of Versailles, in nine months, employing thousands of workers in two shifts.
Hitler, who had remained away from the project, was overwhelmed when Speer turned it over, fully furnished, two days early.
Tesserow was less impressed, puncturing Speer's balloon by suggesting he should have taken nine years over the project.Hitler later asked him him to build a third, even larger Chancellery, although it was never begun.

Speer was supportive of the German invasion of Poland and subsequent war, though he recognized that it would lead to the postponement, at the least, of his architectural dreams.
He placed his department at the disposal of the Wehrmacht.
When Hitler remonstrated, stating that it was not for Speer to decide how his workers should be used, Speer simply ignored him.
Among Speer's innovations were quick-reaction squads to construct roads or clear away debris.
Before long, these units would be used to clear bomb sites.

According to interviews after his imprisonment, as well as his memoirs, Speer adopted a "see no evil" attitude towards the Nazi atrocities.
For example, he claimed to have learned of unspecified disturbing events at Auschwitz through his friend Karl Hanke.
He then purposely avoided visiting the camp or trying to get more information about what was taking place.
In his autobiography, he claims that he had no direct involvement or knowledge of the Holocaust, although he admits having blinded himself to its existence and expresses remorse for this.
He certainly was aware, at least, of harsh conditions for the slave labour, and some critics believe that his books understate his role in the atrocities of the era.
Moreover, documents uncovered by the Berlin historian Susanne Willems suggest that Speer knew a great deal more about the atrocities than he claimed to.In his memoirs, Speer claimed to be "under the spell" of Hitler, finding it difficult to reconcile his personal affection and admiration for Hitler with whatever opposition he may have felt for Hitler's policies.
Nonetheless, during the last weeks of the Third Reich, Speer disobeyed direct orders from Hitler regarding the Nazi's scorched earth policies.
Hitler's order, now commonly known as the Nero Decree, called for the destruction of all German infrastructure in order to hinder the impending allied invasion from accessing Germany's resources.

Speer's acknowledgement of guilt was nuanced.
He acknowledged guilt for being a high official of a criminal government, without acknowledging guilt for any crimes committed by himself.
His self-described crimes seem to be more acts of omission, including failure to make inquiry into the Holocaust, and failure to challenge Hitler.
He painted himself as a nonpolitical technocrat.
However, according to The Guardian,  Speer revealed in a letter he wrote in 1971 to Hélène Jeanty, the widow of a Belgian resistance leader, that he knew of Himmler's plans to exterminate all the Jews, in spite of his earlier claims to have left Himmler's Posen speech early.
In the letter he says, "There is no doubt - I was present as Himmler announced on 6 October 1943 that all Jews would be killed".