His design, using huge flags, was highly effective.
While Hermann Goering took credit for the design, Speer then became the obvious candidate to design the Nuremberg rally in 1933, bringing him into contact with Hitler for the first time.
Speer was sent to Munich to get Hitler's approval for the design.
According to Speer in Inside the Third Reich, Hitler was busy cleaning a pistol, which he laid aside to cast a brief, interested look at the plans, and approved them without ever even looking at the young architect.

Speer's next major assignment was as liaison to the Berlin building trades for Paul Troost's renovation of the Chancellery in Berlin.
Hitler, as Chancellor, remained in residence in the building, and each day he would emerge to be briefed by Speer on the progress of the renovations, before the dictator talked with a number of the workmen.
After one of these briefings, Hitler invited Speer to lunch, and before long, Speer received a stream of invitations to Hitler's residences, or to travel with Hitler on journeys.
The two men found much in common: Hitler prized fellow artists like Speer with whom he felt a certain kinship, especially as Hitler himself had previously entertained architectural ambitions.
The young, ambitious architect was dazzled at becoming part of the inner circle, which guaranteed him a flood of commissions from the government and the very highest ranks of the Party.

In January 1938, Hitler asked Speer to build a new Reich Chancellery, stating that he needed it for urgent foreign policy reasons not later than his next New Year's reception for diplomats on January 10, 1939.
This was a huge undertaking, especially since the existing Chancellery was in full operation.
After consultation with his assistants, Speer agreed.
It was not until April that the site could be cleared, and Speer was successful in building the structure, which included a vast hall designed to be twice as long as the Hall of Mirrors in the Palace of Versailles, in nine months, employing thousands of workers in two shifts.
Hitler, who had remained away from the project, was overwhelmed when Speer turned it over, fully furnished, two days early.
Tesserow was less impressed, puncturing Speer's balloon by suggesting he should have taken nine years over the project.Hitler later asked him him to build a third, even larger Chancellery, although it was never begun.

Speer was supportive of the German invasion of Poland and subsequent war, though he recognized that it would lead to the postponement, at the least, of his architectural dreams.
He placed his department at the disposal of the Wehrmacht.
When Hitler remonstrated, stating that it was not for Speer to decide how his workers should be used, Speer simply ignored him.
Among Speer's innovations were quick-reaction squads to construct roads or clear away debris.
Before long, these units would be used to clear bomb sites.

According to interviews after his imprisonment, as well as his memoirs, Speer adopted a "see no evil" attitude towards the Nazi atrocities.
For example, he claimed to have learned of unspecified disturbing events at Auschwitz through his friend Karl Hanke.
He then purposely avoided visiting the camp or trying to get more information about what was taking place.
In his autobiography, he claims that he had no direct involvement or knowledge of the Holocaust, although he admits having blinded himself to its existence and expresses remorse for this.
He certainly was aware, at least, of harsh conditions for the slave labour, and some critics believe that his books understate his role in the atrocities of the era.
Moreover, documents uncovered by the Berlin historian Susanne Willems suggest that Speer knew a great deal more about the atrocities than he claimed to.In his memoirs, Speer claimed to be "under the spell" of Hitler, finding it difficult to reconcile his personal affection and admiration for Hitler with whatever opposition he may have felt for Hitler's policies.
Nonetheless, during the last weeks of the Third Reich, Speer disobeyed direct orders from Hitler regarding the Nazi's scorched earth policies.
Hitler's order, now commonly known as the Nero Decree, called for the destruction of all German infrastructure in order to hinder the impending allied invasion from accessing Germany's resources.

Speer's acknowledgement of guilt was nuanced.
He acknowledged guilt for being a high official of a criminal government, without acknowledging guilt for any crimes committed by himself.
His self-described crimes seem to be more acts of omission, including failure to make inquiry into the Holocaust, and failure to challenge Hitler.
He painted himself as a nonpolitical technocrat.
However, according to The Guardian,  Speer revealed in a letter he wrote in 1971 to Hélène Jeanty, the widow of a Belgian resistance leader, that he knew of Himmler's plans to exterminate all the Jews, in spite of his earlier claims to have left Himmler's Posen speech early.
In the letter he says, "There is no doubt - I was present as Himmler announced on 6 October 1943 that all Jews would be killed".