Habit Members of the Apiaceae can be annual, biennial or perennial.
Most are herbs, though a minority are shrubs or trees.
Frequently they have a basal aggregation of leaves.
Leaves The leaves are small to large, alternately arranged, or alternate and opposite with the upper leaves nearly opposite.
Most species have "herbaceous" leaves, though in some taxa they are leathery, fleshy, or even rigid.
They are petiolate, or perfoliate and more or less sheathing.
The lamina are usually dissected and pinnatifid, but entire in some genera.
Most are aromatic to foetid when crushed, though a small number are without marked odour.
Stomata are present.
Inflorescences The flowers are nearly always aggregated in umbels, or rarely in heads.
Often cymose umbels arranged in cymose inflorescences.
They are always terminal.
Flowers Are perfect in most taxa (hermaphroditic), but some are andromonoecious, polygamomonoecious, or even dioecious (Acronema).
The perianth is radially symmetrical, and has a distinct calyx and corolla, but the calyx if often highly reduced, to the point of being undetectable in many species.
The flowers are nearly 5-merous, that is, have 5 petals, 5 sepals, and 5 stamens, but only 2 carpels in the gynoecium.
Ovaries are inferior, and 2-celled, with one anatropous ovule within each locule.
The corolla can be white, yellow, pink or purple.
Fruits Are non-fleshy (a schizocarp), with two mericarps.
Each mericarp is 1-seeded, and splits apart at maturity.
Each seed contains oily endosperm.

The Apiaceae was first described by John Lindley in 1836.
The name is derived from the type genus Apium, which was originally used by Pliny the Elder circa 50 AD for a celery-like plant.
The alternative name for the family, Umbelliferae, derives from the inflorescence being generally in the form of a compound umbel.
Many members of this family are cultivated for various purposes.
The plant structure includes a tap root, which can be large enough to be useful in food, as with parsnips (Pastinaca sativa), carrots (Daucus carota), and Hamburg parsley (Petroselinum crispum).
Many plants of this group are also adapted to conditions that encourage heavy concentrations of essential oils, and as a result some are flavourful aromatic herbs.
Examples are parsley (Petroselinum crispum), cilantro (Coriandrum sativum), and dill (Anethum graveolens).
The plentiful seeds of the umbers, likewise, are sometimes used in cuisine, as with coriander (Coriandrum sativum), fennel (Foeniculum vulgare), cumin (Cuminum cyminum), and caraway (Carum carvi).

Other notable cultivated Apiaceae include chervil (Anthriscus cerefolium), angelica (Angelica spp.
), celery (Apium graveolens), arracacha (Arracacia xanthorrhiza), gotu kola/pennywort (Centella asiatica), poison hemlock (Conium maculatum), sea holly (Eryngium spp.
), asafoetida (Ferula asafoetida), galbanum (Ferula gummosa), cicely (Myrrhis odorata), anise (Pimpinella anisum), lovage (Levisticum officinale), and hacquetia (Hacquetia epipactis).

The androecium contains of 5 stamens, but there is often variation in the functionality of the stamens even within a single inflorescence.
Some flowers are functionally staminate (where a pistil may be present but has no ovules capable of being fertilized) while others are functionally pistillate (where stamens are present but their anthers do not produce viable pollen).
Pollination one flower by the pollen of different flower of the same plant (geitonogamy) is common.
The gynoecium consists of two carpels fused into a single, bicarpellate pistil with an inferior ovary.
When mature, the fused carpels separate into two mericarps.
Stylopodiums secrete nectar, attracting pollinators like flies, mosquitoes, gnats, beetles, moths, and bees.

Some fruit segments (like those in Daucus spp.
are covered in bristles and spread via external transport.
The seeds have an oily endosperm and generally contain large quantities of fatty oils, with the fatty acid petroselinic acid occurring universally throughout the family while rarely being found outside of the Apiaceae.

Conicum maculatum has been used as a sedative and in treatments for arthritis and asthma in addition to its most famous use: as a “humane” method of killing criminals and philosophers.
Daucus carota has been used as a diuretic, as a stimulant, to aid in uterine ailments, and one time as a treatment for jaundice.
According to the Greek physician and botanist Dioscorides, “ —especially Bastard or Wild Parsley—provokes venery and bodily lust and erection of the parts.” Fennel has been used to treat nausea; species of Ferula have been used to ease constipation and coughs; Cuminum cyminum has been used as a treatment for diarrhea; coriander for halitosis; Eryngium spp.
to treat genitourinary problems; Centella asiatica to treat syphilis; and Ferula assa-foetida has been used as a carminative, antispasmodic, and stimulant.
The poisonous members of the Apiaceae have been used for a variety of purposes globally.
The poisonous Oenanthe crocata has been used to stupefy fish, Cicuta douglasii has been used as an aid in suicides, and arrow poisons have been made from various other family species.
Daucus carota has been used as coloring for butter and its roots used as a coffee substitute.
Dorema ammoniacum, Ferula galbaniflua, and Ferula sumbul are sources of incense.
The woody Azorella compacta Phil.
has been used in South America for fuel.

Apiaceae.
2011.
Utah State University Intermountain Herbarium.
20 October 2011. http://herbarium.usu.edu/taxa/apiaceae.htm  Constance, L. (1971).
“History of the classification of Umbelliferae (Apiaceae).” in Heywood, V. H., The biology and chemistry of the Umbelliferae, 1-11.
Academic Press, London.
Cronquist, A.
(1968).
The Evolution and Classification of Flowering Plants.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
French, D. H. (1971).
“Ethnobotany of the Umbelliferae.” in Heywood, V. H., The biology and chemistry of the Umbelliferae, 385-412.
Academic Press, London.
Hegnauer, R. (1971) “Chemical Patterns and Relationships of Umbelliferae.” in Heywood, V. H., The biology and chemistry of the Umbelliferae, 267-277.
Academic Press, London.
Heywood, V. H. (1971).
“Systematic survey of Old World Umbelliferae.” in Heywood, V. H., The biology and chemistry of the Umbelliferae, 31-41.
Academic Press, London.
Judd, W. S. et al.
(1999).
Plant Systematics: A Phylogenetic Approach.
Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates, Inc. Plunkett, G. M. and S. R. Downie (1999).
“Major lineages within Apiaceae subfamily Apioideae: a comparison of chloroplast restriction site and DNA sequence data.” American Journal of Botany, 86, 1014-1026.
Plunkett, G. M., D. E. Soltis, and P. S. Soltis (1996).
“Higher Level Relationships of Apiales (Apiaceae and Araliaceae) Based on Phylogenetic Analysis of rbcL Sequences.” Botanical Society of America, 83 (4), 499-515.
Plunkett, G. M., D. E. Soltis, and P. S. Soltis (1996).
“Evolutionary Patters in Apiaceae: Inferences Based on matK Sequence Data.” American Society of Plant Taxonomists, 21 (4), 477-495.